ar
X
iv
:1
70
9.
01
75
7v
1 
 [
cs
.I
T
] 
 6
 S
ep
 2
01
7
1
Compressive Sensing Techniques for
Next-Generation Wireless Communications
Zhen Gao, Linglong Dai, Senior Member, IEEE, Shuangfeng Han, Chih-Lin I, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhaocheng
Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Lajos Hanzo, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—A range of efficient wireless processes and enabling
techniques are put under a magnifier glass in the quest for
exploring different manifestations of correlated processes, where
sub-Nyquist sampling may be invoked as an explicit benefit of
having a sparse transform-domain representation. For example,
wide-band next-generation systems require a high Nyquist-
sampling rate, but the channel impulse response (CIR) will be
very sparse at the high Nyquist frequency, given the low number
of reflected propagation paths. This motivates the employment
of compressive sensing based processing techniques for frugally
exploiting both the limited radio resources and the network
infrastructure as efficiently as possible. A diverse range of
sophisticated compressed sampling techniques is surveyed and
we conclude with a variety of promising research ideas related
to large-scale antenna arrays, non-orthogonal multiple access
(NOMA), and ultra-dense network (UDN) solutions, just to name
a few.
Index Terms—5G, compressive sensing (CS), sparsity, mas-
sive MIMO, millimeter-wave (mmWave) communications, non-
orthogonal multiple access (NOMA), ultra-dense networks
(UDN).
I. INTRODUCTION
The explosive growth of traffic demand resulted in gradually
approaching the system capacity of the operational cellular
networks [1]. It is widely recognized that substantial sys-
tem capacity improvement is required for 5G in the next
decade [1]. To tackle this challenge, a suite of 5G techniques
and proposals have emerged, accompanied by: i) increased
spectral efficiency relying on multi-antenna techniques and
novel multiple access techniques offering more bits/sec/Hz per
node; ii) a larger transmission bandwidth relying on spectrum
sharing and extension; iii) improved spectrum reuse relying
on network densification having more nodes per unit area.
Historically speaking, the transmission bandwidth has in-
creased from 200 kHz in the 2G GSM system to 5 MHz
in the 3G, to at most 20 MHz in the 4G. Meanwhile, the
number of antennas employed also increases from 1 in the
2G/3G systems to 8 in 4G, along with the increasing density
of both the base stations (BSs) deployed and users sup-
ported. Despite the gradual quantitative increase of bandwidth,
Z. Gao is with Advanced Research Institute for Multidisciplinary Sci-
ence, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, P. R. China (E-mail:
gaozhen16@bit.edu.cn).
L. Dai, and Z. Wang are with Tsinghua National Laboratory for Infor-
mation Science and Technology (TNList), Department of Electronic Engi-
neering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China (E-mails: {daill,
zcwang}@tsinghua.edu.cn).
S. Han and C. L. I are with Green Communication Research Center
China Mobile Research Institute, Beijing 100053, P. R. China (E-mails:
{hanshuangfeng, icl}@chinamobile.com).
L. Hanzo is with Electronics and Computer Science, University of
Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, U.K. (E-mail: lh@ecs.soton.ac.uk).
number of antennas, density of BS and users, all previous
wireless cellular networks have relied upon the classic Nyquist
sampling theorem, stating that any bandwidth-limited signal
can be perfectly reconstructed, when the sampling rate is
higher than twice the signal’s highest frequency. However, the
emerging 5G solutions will require at least 100 MHz band-
width, hundreds of antennas, and ultra-densely deployed BSs
to support massive users. These qualitative changes indicate
that applying Nyquist’s sampling theorem to 5G techniques
reminiscent of the previous 2G/3G/4G solutions may result in
unprecedented challenges: prohibitively large overheads, unaf-
fordable complexity, and high cost and/or power consumption
due to the large number of samples required. On the other
hand, compressive sensing (CS) offers a sub-Nyquist sampling
approach to the reconstruction of sparse signals of an under-
determined linear system in a computationally efficient man-
ner [2]. Given the large bandwidth of next-generation systems
and the proportionally high Nyquist-frequency, we arrive at an
excessive number of resolvable multipath components, even
though only a small fraction of them is non-negligible. This
phenomenon inspired us to sample the resultant sparse channel
impulse response (CIR) as well as other signals under the
framework of CS, thus offering us opportunities to tackle the
above-mentioned challenges [2].
To be more specific, in Section II, we first introduce the key
5G techniques, while in Section III, we present the concept of
CS, where three fundamental elements, four models, and the
associated recovery algorithms are introduced. Furthermore,
in Sections IV, V and VI, we investigate the opportunities
and challenges of applying the CS techniques to those key
5G solutions by exploiting the multifold sparsity inherent, as
briefly presented below:
• We exploit the CIR-sparsity in the context of massive
MIMO systems both for reducing the channel-sounding
overhead required for reliable channel estimation, as
well as the spatial modulation (SM)-based signal sparsity
inherent in massive SM-MIMO and the codeword sparsity
of non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) in order to
reduce the signal detection complexity.
• We exploit the sparse spectrum occupation with the aid
of cognitive radio (CR) techniques and the sparsity of
the ultra-wide band (UWB) signal for reducing both
the hardware cost as well as the power consumption.
Similarly, we exploit the CIR sparsity in millimeter-wave
(mmWave) communications for improving the transmit
precoding performance as well as for reducing the CIR
estimation overhead.
• Finally, we exploit the sparsity of the interfering base
2
Required Capacity in 5G
 Massive Multi-Antenna Techniques
 Non-Orthogonal Multiple Access
Spectral Efficiency
 Interference Cancellation  
 Cooperation
 Connecting Massive Devices
 Traffic Load Prediction 
Code
Frequency
Time
Spectrum Reuse
 Cognitive Radio
 Ultra-Wide Band
 mmWave Communications
Transmission Bandwidth
Microwave Bands
(2G/3G/4G)
Higher Frequency Bands
Very Wide Super Wide
Current 
Capacity
Fig. 1. Three promising technical directions for 5G.
stations (BSs) and of the traffic load in ultra-dense
networks (UDN), where sparsity can be capitalized on by
reducing the overheads required for inter-cell-interference
(ICI) mitigation, for coordinated multiple points (CoMP)
transmission/reception, for large-scale random access and
for traffic prediction.
We believe that these typical examples can further inspire
the conception of a plethora of potential sparsity exploration
and exploitation techniques. Our hope is that you valued
colleague might also become inspired to contribute to this
community-effort.
II. KEY TECHNICAL DIRECTIONS IN 5G
The celebrated Shannon capacity formula indicates the total
network capacity can be approximated as
Cnetwork ?
I
?
i
J
?
j
Wi,j log2 (1 + ?i,j), (1)
where i and j are the indices of cells and channels, re-
spectively, I and J are the numbers of cells and channels,
respectively, Wi,j and ?i,j are the associated bandwidth and
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR), respectively. As
shown in Fig. 1 at a glance, increasing Cnetwork for next-
generation systems relies on 1) achieving an increased spec-
tral efficiency with larger number of channels, for example
by spatial-multiplexing MIMO; 2) an increased transmission
bandwidth including spectrum sharing and extension; and 3)
better spectrum reuse relying on more cells per area for
improving the area-spectral-efficiency (ASE). To elaborate a
little further:
1) Increased spectral efficiency can be achieved for ex-
ample: first, massive multi-antenna aided spatial-multiplexing
techniques can substantially boost the system capacity, albeit
both the channel estimation in massive MIMO [3], [4] and
the signal detection of massive spatial modulation (SM)-
MIMO [5] remain challenging issues; second, NOMA tech-
niques are theoretically capable of supporting more users than
conventional orthogonal multiple access (OMA) under the
constraint of limited radio resources, but the optimal design of
sparse codewords capable of approaching the NOMA capacity
remains an open problem at the time of writing [6].
2) Larger transmission bandwidth may be invoked relying
on both CR [7], [8] and UWB [9], [10] techniques, both of
which can coexist with licenced services under the umbrella
of spectrum sharing, where the employment of sub-Nyquist
sampling is of salient importance. As another promising
candidate, mmWave communications is capable of facilitating
high data rates with the aid of its wider bandwidth [1], [11],
[12]. However, due to the limited availability of hardware
at a low cost and owing to its high path-loss, both channel
estimation and transmit precoding are more challenging in
mmWave systems than those in the existing cellular systems.
3) Better spectrum reuse can be realized with the aid
of small cells [1], which improves the ASE expressed in
bits/sec/Hz/km2. However, how to realize interference mitiga-
tion, CoMP transmission/reception and massive random access
imposes substantial challenges [13]–[15].
III. COMPRESSIVE SENSING THEORY
Naturally, most continuous signals from the real world
exhibit some inherent redundancy or correlation, which im-
plies that the effective amount of information conveyed by
them is typically lower than the maximum amount carried
by uncorrelated signals in the same bandwidth [2]. This
is exemplified by the inter-sample correlation of so-called
voiced speech segments, by adjacent video pixels, correlated
fading channel envelopes, etc. Hence the number of effective
3
TABLE I
TYPICAL CS MODELS
Types
of Model
CS Models Mathematical Expression Illustration
Model (1)
Standard
CS model [2]
y = ?x = ??s = ?s ? = ??
Model (2)
Signal separation by
sparse representations [2]
y? =
P?
p=1
?psp = ?1s1 +
P?
p=2
?psp
? ?? ?
interference
= ?s
?= [?1,?2, · · · ,?P ], s =
[
sT1 , s
T
2 , · · · , s
T
P
]T
sp and ?p are the pth sparse
signal and the pth measure-
ment matrix, respectively, s
is the sparse aggregate signal
Model (3) Block sparse signal [2]
y = ?s, s appears the block sparsity, e.g.,
s = [s1 · · · sd
? ?? ?
s
T[1]
sd+1 · · · s2d
? ?? ?
s
T[2]
· · · sN?d+1 · · · sN
? ?? ?
s
T[L]
]T
dL=N , and sT[l] for 1 ? l ? L
has non-zero Euclidean norm for
at most k indices
Model (4)
Multiple vector
measurement (MMV) [2]
[y1,y2, · · · ,yP ] = ? [s1, s2, · · · , sP ],
{sp}
P
p=1 share the identical or partially
common sparsity pattern
sp and yp for 1 ? p ? P are
the sparse signal and measured
signal associated with the pth
observation, respectively
degrees of freedom of the corresponding sampled discrete time
signals can be much smaller than that potentially allowed by
their dimensions. This indicates that these correlated time-
domain (TD) signals typically can be represented by much less
samples in the frequency-domain (FD) [2], because correlated
signals only have a few non-negligible low-frequency FD
components. Just to give a simple example, a sinusoidal signal
can be represented by a single non-zero frequency-domain
tone after the transformation by the Fast Fourier transformation
(FFT). Sometimes this is also referred to as the energy-
compaction property of the FFT. Against this background, CS
theory has been developed and applied in diverse fields, which
shows that the sparsity of a signal can indeed be exploited to
recover a replica of the original signal from fewer samples
than that required by the classic Nyquist sampling theorem.
To briefly introduce CS theory, we consider the sparse signal
x ? Cn×1 having the sparsity level of k (i.e., x has only
k ? n non-zero elements), which is characterized by the
measurement matrix of ? ? Cm×n associated with m ? n,
where y = ?x ? Cm×1 is the measured signal. In CS
theory, the key issue is how to recover x by solving the
under-determined set of equations y = ?x, given y and ?.
Generally, x may not exhibit sparsity itself, but it may exhibit
sparsity in some transformed domain, which is formulated as
x = ?s, where ? is the transform matrix and s is the sparse
signal associated with the sparsity level k. Hence we can
formulate the standard CS Model (1) of Table I. Additionally,
we can infer from the standard CS Model (1) of Table I
the equally important Models (2), (3), and (4) of Table I,
which can provide more reliable compression and recovery
of sparse signals, when some of the specific sparse properties
of practical applications are considered. Specifically, Model
(2) is capable of separating multiple sparse signals {sp}
P
p=1
associated with different measurement matrices {?p}
P
p=1 by
recovering the aggregate sparse signal s =
[
sT
1
, sT
2
, · · · , sTP
]T
;
Model (3) has the potential of improving the estimation
performance of s by exploiting the block sparsity of s, as
shown in Table I; Model (4) is capable of enhancing the
estimation performance of P sparse signals {sp}
P
p=1, when
their identical/partially common sparsity pattern is exploited.
Considering the standard CS model, we arrive at the three
fundamental elements of CS theory as follows. 1) Sparse
transformation is essential for CS, since finding a suitable
transform matrix ? can efficiently transform the original (non-
sparse) signal x into the sparse signal s. 2) Sparse signal
compression refers to the design of ? or ? = ??. ? should
reduce the dimension of measurements, while minimizing the
information loss imposed, which can be quantified in terms of
the coherence or restricted isometry property (RIP) of ? or ?
[2]. 3) Sparse signal recovery algorithms are important for
the reliable reconstruction of x or s from the measured signal
y. Particularly, the CS algorithms widely applied in wireless
communications can be mainly divided into three categories
as follows.
i) Convex relaxation algorithms such as basis pursuit (BP)
as well as BP de-noising (BPDN), and so on, can formulate
the CS problem as a convex optimization problem and solve
them using convex optimization software like CVX [2]. For
instance, the CS problem for Model (1) of Table I can be
formulated as a Lagrangian relaxation of a quadratic program
as
s? = argmin
s
?s?
1
+ ??y ??s?
2
, (2)
with ?·?
1
and ?·?
2
being l1-norm and l2-norm operators,
respectively, and ? > 0, and the resultant algorithms belong
to the BPDN family. These algorithms usually require a small
number of measurements, but they are complex, e.g., the
complexity of BP algorithm is on the order of O
(
m2n3/2
)
[2].
ii) Greedy iterative algorithms can identify the support set in
a greedy iterative manner. They have a low complexity and fast
speed of recovery, but suffer from a performance loss, when
the signals are not very sparse. The representatives of these
algorithms are orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP), CoSaMP,
and subspace pursuit (SP), which have the complexity of
O (kmn) [2].
4
iii) Bayesian inference algorithms like sparse Bayesian
learning and approximate message passing infer the sparse
unknown signal from the Bayesian viewpoint by considering
the sparse priori. The complexity of these algorithms varies
from individual to individual. For example, the complexity
of Bayesian compressive sensing via belief propagation is
O
(
nlog2n
)
[2]. Note that, the algorithms mentioned above
have to be further developed for Models (2)-(4) of Table I.
For example, the group-sparse BPDN, the simultaneous OMP
(SOMP), and the group-sparse Bayesian CS algorithms tai-
lored for MMV Model (4) are promising future candidates [2].
Since the conception of CS theory in 2004, it has been
extensively developed, extended and applied to practical sys-
tems. Indeed, prototypes for MIMO radar, CR, UWB, and
so on based on CS theory have been reported by Eldar’s
research group [2]. Undoubtedly, the emerging CS theory
provides us with a revolutionary tool for reconstructing signals,
despite using sub-Nyquist sampling rates [2]. Therefore, how
to exploit CS theory in the emerging 5G wireless networks has
become a hot research topic [3]–[5], [7]–[15]. By exploring
and exploiting the inherent sparsity in all aspects of wireless
networks, we can create more efficient 5G networks. In the
following sections, we will explore and exploit the sparsity
inherent in future 5G wireless networks in the context of the
three specific technical directions discussed in Section II.
IV. HIGHER SPECTRAL EFFICIENCY
The first technical direction to support the future 5G vision
is to increase the spectral efficiency, where massive MIMO,
massive SM-MIMO and NOMA schemes constitute promising
candidates. This section will discuss how to explore and
exploit the sparsity inherent in these key 5G techniques.
A. Massive MIMO Schemes
Massive MIMO employing hundreds of antennas at the
BS are capable of simultaneously serving multiple users
at an improved spectral- and the energy-efficiency [3], [4].
Although massive MIMO indeed exhibit attractive advantages,
a challenging issue that hinders the evolution from the current
frequency division duplex (FDD) cellular networks to FDD
massive MIMO is the indispensible estimation and feedback
of the downlink FDD channels to the transmitter. However,
for FDD massive MIMO, the users have to estimate the
downlink channels associated with hundreds of transmit and
receive antenna pairs, which results in a prohibitively high
pilot overhead. Moreover, even if the users have succeeded in
acquiring accurate downlink channel state information (CSI),
its feedback to the BS requires a high feedback rate. Hence
the codebook-based CSI-quantization and feedback remains
challenging, while the overhead of analog CSI feedback is
simply unaffordable [4]. By contrast, in time division duplex
(TDD) massive MIMO, the downlink CSI can be acquired
from the uplink CSI by exploiting the channel’s reciprocity,
provided that the interference is also similar at both ends of the
link. Furthermore, the pilot contamination may significantly
degrade the system’s performance due to the limited number
of orthogonal pilots, which hence have to be reused in adjacent
cells [3].
Fortunately, recent experiments have shown that due to the
limited number of significant scatterers in the propagation
environments and owing to the strong spatial correlation
inherent in the co-located antennas at the BS, the massive
MIMO channels exhibit sparsity either in the delay domain [3]
or in the angular domain or in both [4]. For massive MIMO
channels observed in the delay domain, the number of paths
containing the majority of the received energy is usually much
smaller than the total number of CIR taps, which implies
that the massive MIMO CIRs exhibit sparsity in the delay
domain and can be estimated using the standard CS Model
(1) of Table I, where s is the sparse delay-domain CIR, ?
consists of pilot signals, and y is the received signal [3]. Due
to the co-located nature of the antenna elements, the CIRs
associated with different transmit and receiver antenna pairs
further exhibit structured sparsity, which manifests itself in the
block-sparsity Model (3) of [3]. Moreover, the BS antennas are
usually found at elevated location with much few scatterers
around, while the users roam at ground-level and experience
rich scatterers. Therefore, the massive MIMO CIRs seen from
the BS exhibit only limited angular spread, which indicates
that the CIRs exhibit sparsity in the angular domain [4]. Due
to the common scatterers shared by multiple users close to
each other, the massive multi-user MIMO channels further
have the structured sparsity and can be jointly estimated using
the MMV Model (4) of Table I [4]. Additionally, this sparsity
can also be exploited for mitigating the pilot contamination in
TDD massive MIMO, where the CSI of the adjacent cells can
be estimated with the aid of the signal separation Model (2) for
further interference mitigation or for multi-point cooperation.
Remark: Exploiting the sparsity of massive MIMO channels
with the aid of CS theory to reduce the overhead required
for channel estimation and feedback are expected to solve
various open challenges and constitute a hot topic in the field
of massive MIMO [3], [4]. However, if the pilot signals of CS-
based solutions are tailored to a sub-Nyquist sampling rate,
ensuring its compatibility with the existing systems based on
the classic Nyquist sampling rate requires further research.
B. Massive SM-MIMO Schemes
In massive MIMO systems, each antenna requires a ded-
icated radio frequency (RF) chain, which will substantially
increase the power consumption of RF circuits, when the
number of BS antennas becomes large. To circumvent this
issue, as shown in Fig. 2, the BS of massive SM-MIMO
employs hundreds of antennas, but a much smaller number
of RF chains and antennas is activated for transmission.
Explicitly, only a small fraction of the antennas is selected for
the transmission of classic modulated signals in each time slot.
For massive SM-MIMO, a 3-D constellation diagram including
the classic signal constellation and the spatial constellation is
exploited. Moreover, massive SM-MIMO can also be used in
the uplink [5], where multiple users equipped with a single-RF
chain, but multiple antennas can simultaneously transmit their
SM signals to the BS. In this way, the uplink throughput can
5
M    MRF
A
n
ten
n
a 
S
w
itch
in
g
RF
B
aseb
an
d
 S
ig
n
al
BS
B
aseb
an
d
 
S
ig
n
al
User 1
RF 
chain
1
2
nt
1
2
M
3
1
2
MRF
1
2
nt
1
2
nt
Uplink 
SM signal
Downlink
SM signal
Uplink
SM signal
Uplink 
SM signal
(a)
Codebook 1 Codebook 2 Codebook 3 Codebook 4 Codebook 5 Codebook 6
+ + +
10 01 11 10 00 01
(b)
RF 
Chain
RF 
Chain
RF 
Chain
B
aseb
an
d
 
S
ig
n
al
User 2
RF 
chain
B
aseb
an
d
 
S
ig
n
al
User K
RF 
chain
Fig. 2. The SM signals in massive SM-MIMO systems are sparse.
also be improved by using SM, albeit at the cost of having
no transmit diversity gain. This problem can be mitigated by
activating a limited fraction of the antennas.
Due to the potentially higher number of transmit anten-
nas than the number of activated receive antennas, signal
detection and channel estimation in massive SM-MIMO can
be a large-scale under-determined problem. The family of
optimal maximum likelihood or near-optimal sphere decoding
algorithms suffers from a potentially excessive complexity. By
contrast, the conventional low-complexity linear algorithms,
such as the linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE)
algorithm, suffer from the obvious performance loss inflicted
by under-determined rank-deficient systems. Fortunately, it can
be observed that in the downlink of massive SM-MIMO, since
only a fraction of the transmit antennas are active in each
time slot, the downlink SM signals are sparse in the signal
domain. Hence, we can use the standard CS Model (1) of
Table I for developing SM signal detection, where s is the
sparse SM signal, ? is the MIMO channel matrix, and y is the
received signal. Moreover, observe in Fig. 2 that for the uplink
of massive SM-MIMO, each user’s uplink SM signal also
exhibits sparsity, thus the aggregated SM signal incorporating
all of the multiple users’ uplink SM signals exhibits sparsity.
Therefore, it is expected that by exploiting the sparsity of the
aggregated SM signals, we can use the signal separation Model
(2) of Table I to develop a low-complexity, high-accuracy
signal detector for improved uplink signal detection [5].
Remark: The sparsity of SM signals can be exploited for
reducing the computational complexity of signal detection at
the receiver. To elaborate a little further, channel estimation in
massive SM-MIMO is more challenging than that in massive
MIMO, since only a fraction of the antennas are active in each
time slot. Hence, how to further explore the intrinsic sparsity
of massive SM-MIMO channels and how to exploit the esti-
mated CSI associated with the active antennas to reconstruct
the complete CSI is a challenging problem requiring further
investigations.
Codebook 1 Codebook 2 Codebook 3 Codebook 4 Codebook 5 Codebook 6
10 01 11 10 00 01
Fig. 3. SCMA is capable of supporting overloaded transmission by sparse
code domain multiplexing.
C. Sparse Codewords in NOMA systems
Cellular networks of the first four generations obeyed dif-
ferent orthogonal multiple access (OMA) techniques [6]. In
contrast to conventional OMA techniques, such as frequency
division multiple access (FDMA), time division multiple ac-
cess (TDMA), and orthogonal frequency division multiple
access (OFDMA), NOMA systems are potentially capable
of supporting more users/devices by using non-orthogonal
resources, albeit typically at the cost of increased receiver
complexity.
As a competitive NOMA candidate, sparse code multiple
access (SCMA) supports the users with the aid of their unique
user-specific spreading sequence, which are however non-
orthogonal to each other - similar to classic m-sequences, as
illustrated in Fig. 3 [6]. Each codeword exhibits sparsity and
represents a spread transmission layer. In the uplink, the BS
can then uniquely and unambiguously distinguish the different
sparse codewords of multiple users relying on non-orthogonal
resources. In the downlink, more than one transmission layers
can be transmitted to each of the multiple users with the aid of
the above-mentioned non-orthogonal codewords. The SCMA
signal detection problem can be readily formulated as the
signal separation Model (2) of Table I, where the columns of
?p consist of the pth user’s codewords, and sp is a vector with
0 and 1 binary values and only one non-zero element. Amongst
others, the low-complexity message passing algorithm (MPA)
can be invoked by the receiver for achieving a near-maximum-
likelihood multi-user detection performance.
Remark: The optimal codeword design of SCMA and the
associated multi-user detector may be designed with the aid of
CS theory for improving the performance versus complexity
trade-off [6].
V. LARGER TRANSMISSION BANDWIDTH
The second technical direction contributing to the 5G vision
is based on the larger transmission bandwidth, where the fam-
ily of promising techniques includes CR, UWB and mmWave
6
communication. How we might explore and exploit sparsity
in these key 5G techniques will be addressed in this section.
A. Cognitive Radio
It has been revealed in the open literature that large portions
of the licensed spectrum remains under-utilized [7], [8], since
the licensed users may not be fully deployed across the
licensed territory or might not occupy the licensed spectrum
all the time, and guard bands may be adopted by primary users
(PUs). Due to the sparse spectrum exploitation, CR has been
advocated for dynamically sensing the unused spectrum and
for allowing the secondary users (SUs) to exploit the spectrum
holes, while imposing only negligible interference on the PUs.
However, enabling dynamic spectrum sensing and shar-
ing of the entire spectral bandwidth is challenging, due to
the high Nyquist sampling rate for SUs to sense a broad
spectrum. To exploit the low spectrum occupancy by the
licensed activities, as verified by extensive experiments and
field tests [7], the compressive spectrum sensing concept,
which can be described by the standard CS Model (1) of
Table I, has been invoked for sensing the spectrum at sub-
Nyquist sampling rates. In CR networks, every SU can sense
the spectrum holes, despite using a sub-Nyquist sampling rate.
However, this strategy may be susceptible to channel fading,
hence collaborative sensing relying on either centralized or
distributed processing has also been proposed [7], [8]. Due to
the collaborative strategy, the sparse spectrum seized by each
SU may share common components, which can be readily
described by the MMV Model (4) of Table I to achieve spatial
diversity [7]. Moreover, integrating a geo-location database
into compressive CR is capable of further improving the
performance attained [8].
Remark: CS-based CR can facilitate the employment of low-
speed analog-to-digital-converter (ADC) instead of the high-
speed ADC required by conventional Nyquist sampling theory.
In closing we mention that in addition to sensing the spectrum
holes by conventional CR schemes, Xampling is also capable
of demodulating the compressed received signals, provided
that their transmission parameters, such as their frame structure
and modulation modes are known [2].
B. Ultra-Wide Band Transmission
UWB systems are capable of achieving Gbps data rates
in short range transmission at a low power consumption [9],
[10]. Due to the ultra-wide bandwidth utilized at a low power-
density, UWB may coexist with licenced services relying on
frequency overlay. Meanwhile, the ultra-short duration of time-
hopping UWB pulses enables it to enjoy fine time-resolution
and multipath immunity, which can be used for wireless
location.
According to Nyquist’s sampling theorem, the GHz band-
width of UWB signals requires a very high Nyquist sampling
rate, which leads to the requirement of high-speed ADC and
to the associated strict timing control at the receiver. This
increases both the power consumption and the hardware cost.
However, the intrinsic time-domain sparsity of the received
line-of-sight (LOS) or non-line-of-sight (NLOS) UWB signals
inspires the employment of an efficient sampling approach
under the framework of CS, where the sparse UWB signals can
be recovered by using sub-Nyquist sampling rates. Moreover,
the UWB signals received over multipath channels can also be
approximately considered as a linear combination of several
signal bases, as in the standard CS Model (1) of Table I, where
these signal bases are closely related to the UWB waveform,
such as the Gaussian pulse or it derivatives [9], [10]. Compared
to those users, who only exploit the time-domain sparsity
of UWB signals, the latter approach can lead to a higher
energy-concentration and to the further improvement of the
sparse representation of the received UWB signals, hence
enhancing the reconstruction performance of the UWB signals
received by using fewer measurements. Besides, CS can be
further applied to estimate channels in UWB transmission
by formulating it as MMV Model (4) of Table 1, where the
common sparsity of multiple received pilot signals is exploited
[10].
Remark: The sparsity of the UWB signals facilitates the
reconstruction of the UWB signals from observations sampled
by the low-speed and power-saving ADCs relying on sub-
Nyquist sampling. The key challenge is how to extract the
complete information characterizing the analog UWB signals
from the compressed measurements. Naturally, if the receiver
only wants to extract the information conveyed by the UWB
signals, it may be capable of directly processing the com-
pressed measurements by skipping the reconstruction of the
UWB signals [9].
C. Millimeter-Wave Communications
The crowded microwave frequency band and the growing
demand for increased data rates motivated researchers to re-
consider the under-utilized mmWave spectrum (30?100 GHz).
Compared to existing cellular communications operating at
sub-6 GHz frequencies, mmWave communications have three
distinctive features: a) the spatial sparsity of channels due to
the high path-loss of NLOS paths, b) the low signal-to-noise-
ratio (SNR) experienced before beamforming, and c) the much
smaller number of RF chains than that of the antennas due
to the hardware constraints in mmWave communications [11],
[12]. Hence, the spatial sparsity of channels can be readily ex-
ploited for designing cost-efficient mmWave communications.
1) Hybrid Analog-Digital Precoding: The employment of
transmit precoding is important for mmWave MIMO systems
to achieve a large beamforming gain for the sake of compen-
sating their high pathloss. However, the practical hardware
constraint makes the conventional full-digital precoding in
mmWave communications unrealistic, since a specific RF
chain required by each antenna in full-digital precoding may
lead to an unaffordable hardware cost and to excessive power
consumption. Meanwhile, conventional analog beamforming
is limited to single-stream transmission and hence fails to
effectively harness spatial multiplexing. To this end, hybrid
analog-digital precoding relying on a much lower number of
RF chains than that of the antennas has been proposed, where
the phase-shifter network can be used for partial beamforming
in the analog RF domain for the sake of an improved spatial
multiplexing [11].
7
The optimal array weight vectors of analog precoding can
be selected from a set of beamforming vectors prestored
according to the estimated channels. Due to the limited number
of RF chains and as a benefit of spatial sparsity of the mmWave
MIMO channels, the hybrid precoding can be formulated as
a sparse signal recovery problem, which was referred to as
spatially sparse precoding [Equ. (18) in 11]. This problem
can be efficiently solved by the modified OMP algorithm.
However, the operation of this CS-based hybrid precoding
scheme is limited to narrow-band channels, while practical
broadband mmWave channels exhibit frequency-selective fad-
ing, which leads to a frequency-dependent hybrid precoding
across the bandwidth [11]. For practical dispersive channels
where OFDM is likely to be used, it is attractive to design
different digital precoding/combining matrices for the different
subchannels, which may then be combined with a common
analog precodering/combining matrix with the aid of CS
theory.
2) Channel Estimation: Hybrid precoding relies on accu-
rate channel estimation, which is practically challenging for
mmWave communications relying on sophisticated transceiver
algorithms, such as multiuser MIMO techniques. In order to
reduce the training overhead required for accurate channel
estimation, CS-based estimation schemes have been proposed
in [11], [12] by exploiting the sparsity of mmWave channels.
Compared to conventional MIMO systems, channel estimation
designed for mmWave massive MIMO in conjunction with
hybrid precoding can be more challenging due to the much
smaller number of RF chains than that of the antennas. The
mmWave massive MIMO flat-fading channel estimation can
be formulated as the standard CS Model (1) of Table I [Equ.
(24) in 11], where s is the sparse channel vector in the angular
domain, the hybrid precoding and combining matrices as well
as the angular domain transform matrix compose ?. While
for dispersive mmWave MIMO channels, the sparsity of angle
of arrival (AoA), angle of departure (AoD), and multipath
delay indicates that the channel has a low-rank property.
This property can be leveraged to reconstruct the dispersive
mmWave MIMO CIR, despite using a reduced number of
observations [12].
Remark: By exploiting the sparsity of mmWave channels,
CS can be readily exploited both for reducing the complexity
of hybrid precoding and for mitigating the training overhead
of channel estimation. However, as to how we can extend
the existing CS-based solutions from narrow-band systems to
broadband mmWave MIMO systems is still under investiga-
tion.
VI. BETTER SPECTRUM REUSE
The third technical direction to realize the 5G vision is
to improve the frequency reuse, which can be most dra-
matically improved by reducing the cell-size [1]. Ultra-dense
small cells including femocells, picocells, visible-light atto-
cells are capable of supporting seamless coverage, in a high
energy efficiency, and a high user-capacity. Explicitly, they can
substantially decrease the power consumption used for radio
access, since the shorter distance between the small-cell BSs
and the users reduces the path-loss [13]–[15]. This section
will address how to explore and exploit the sparsity in dense
networks under the framework of CS theory.
A. BSs Identification
The ultra-dense small cells may impose non-negligible ICI,
which significantly degrades the received SINR. Thus, efficient
interference cancellation is required for such interference-
limited systems. In conventional cellular systems, orthogonal
time-, frequency-, and code resources can be used for ef-
fectively mitigating the ICI. By contrast, in the ultra-dense
small cells, mitigating the ICI in the face of limited orthogonal
resources remains an open challenge [13].
In the ultra-dense small cells of Fig. 4 (a), a user will be
interfered by multiple interfering BSs. The actual number of
interfering BSs for a certain user is usually small, although the
number of available BSs can be large. Hence, the identification
of the interfering BSs can be formulated based on the CS
Model (1) of Table I, where indices of non-zero elements
in s corresponds to the interfering BSs, ? consists of the
training signals, and y is the received signal at the users. To
identify the interfering BSs, each BS transmits non-orthogonal
training signals based on their respective cell identity. Then
the users detect both the identity and even the CSI of the
interfering BSs from the non-orthogonal received signals at a
small overhead. Moreover, the ICI may be further mitigated
by using the signal separation Model (2) of Table I via the
CoMP transmission, where the interfering BSs becomes the
coordinated BSs. Additionally, by exploiting the observations
from multiple antennas in the spatial domain and/or frames in
the temporal domain, the block-sparsity Model (3) and MMV
Model (4) of Table I can be further considered for improved
performance [13].
Remark: The identification of the interfering BSs can be for-
mulated as a CS problem for reducing the associated overhead,
by exploiting the fact that the actual number of BSs interfering
with a certain user’s reception is usually smaller than the total
number of BSs. Under the framework of CS, designing optimal
non-orthogonal training signals and robust yet low-complexity
detection algorithms for identifying these potential BSs with
limited resources are still under investigation.
B. Massive Random Access
It is a widely maintained consensus that the Internet of
Things (IoT) will lead to a plethora of devices connecting to
dense networks for cloud services in 5G networks. However,
the conventional orthogonal resources used for multiple access
impose a hard user-load limit, which may not be able to
cope with the massive connectivity ranging from 102/km2 to
107/km2 for the IoT [1]. It can be observed for each small-cell
BS that although the number of potential users in the coverage
area can be large, the proportion of active users in each time-
slot is likely to remain small due to the random call initiation
attempts of the users accessing typical bursty data services,
as shown in Fig. 4 (b) [14]. In this article, this phenomenon
is referred to as the sparsity of traffic, which points in the
direction of CS-based massive random access.
8
Individual
sparse component
Massive
silent users
Common sparse
 component
(a) (b) (c)
T
ra
ff
ic
 l
o
ad
Time domain
Prediction
History Future
Path loss
HighLow
Sparse Interfering/Cooperative BSs
Fig. 4. Sparsity in ultra-dense networks: (a) Sparse interfering BSs; (b) Sparsity of active users can be exploited to reduce the overhead for massive random
access; (c) Low-rank property of large-scale traffic matrix facilitates its reconstruction with reduced overhead to dynamically manage the network.
More particularly, in the uplink, the users transmit their
unique non-orthogonal training signals to access the cellular
networks. As a result, the small-cell BSs have to detect
multiple active users based on the limited non-orthogonal
resources. This multi-user detection process can be described
by the signal separation Model (2) of Table I [Equ. (2) in 14].
Moreover, due to the ultra-dense nature of the small cells,
the adjacent small-cell BSs can also receive some common
signals, which implies that the adjacent small-cell BSs may
share some common sparse components. Were considering
small-cell BSs constituted by the remote radio head (RRH)
of the cloud radio access network (C-RAN) architecture, this
sparse active-user detection carried out at the baseband unit
(BBU) can be characterized by the MMV Model (4) of Table I.
By exploiting this structured sparsity, it is expected that further
improved active user detection performance can be achieved.
Remark: The sparsity of traffic in UDN can be exploited for
mitigating the access overhead with the aid of CS theory. Com-
pared to the identification of BSs in the downlink, supporting
large-scale random access in the uplink is more challenging:
1) Since the number of users is much higher than that of the
BSs, the design of non-orthogonal training signals under the
CS framework may become more difficult; 2) The centralized
cooperative processing may be optimal, but the compression
of the feedback required for centralized processing may not
be trivial; 3) Distributed processing contributes an alternative
technique of reducing the feedback overhead, but the design
of efficient CS algorithms remains challenging.
C. Traffic Estimation and Prediction for Energy-Efficient
Dense Networks
It has been demonstrated that the majority of power con-
sumption for the radio access is dissipated by the BSs,
but this issue is more challenging in dense networks [1].
To dynamically manage the radio access for the sake of
improved energy efficiency, the estimation of traffic load
is necessary. However, under the classic Nyquist sampling
framework, to estimate the large-scale traffic matrix for UDN,
the measurements required as well as the associated storage,
feedback, and energy consumption may become prohibitively
high. Therefore, it is necessary to explore efficient techniques
of estimating the traffic load for dense networks.
Experiments have shown that the demand for radio access
exhibits the obvious periodic variation on a daily basis and
it also has a spatial variation due to human activities [1].
The strong spatio-temporal correlation of traffic load indicates
that the indicator matrix of traffic load exhibits a low rank,
which inspires us to reconstruct the complete indicator matrix
with the aid of sub-Nyquist sampling techniques [2]. When
partial traffic data is missing, a spatio-temporal Kronecker
compressive sensing method may be involved for recovering
the traffic matrix as the standard CS Model (1) of Table I
[Equ. (15) in 15]. This may motivate us to exploit the low-
rank property for estimating the complete traffic matrix with
a reduced number of observations. Furthermore, if the past
history of the traffic load has been acquired, traffic prediction
may be obtained by exploiting the low-rank property of the
indicator matrix, and then the BSs can dynamically manage
the network for the improved energy efficiency. This process
is illustrated in Fig. 4 (c). To achieve global traffic prediction
from the different BSs, the estimate of traffic load sampled
by different sensors has to be fed back to the fusion center,
which may impose a huge overhead. This challenge may be
mitigated by using part of the historic data for traffic prediction
and by exploiting the low-rank nature of the indicator matrix.
Moreover, since the spatial correlation of traffic load is reduced
as a function of the distance of different BSs, using distributed
CS-based traffic prediction with limited feedback may become
a promising alterative approach to be further studied.
Remark: The low-rank nature of the traffic-indicator matrix
can be exploited for reconstructing the complete indicator
matrix with the aid of sub-Nyquist sampling techniques. In
this way, the measurements used for traffic prediction or their
feedback to the fusion center can be reduced.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
CS has inspired the entire signal processing community
and in this treatise we revisited the realms of next-generation
wireless communications technologies. On the one hand, the
very wide bandwidth, hundreds of antennas, and ultra-densely
deployed BSs to support massive users in those 5G techniques
will result in the prohibitively large overheads, unaffordable
complexity, high cost and/or power consumption due to the
large number of samples required by Nyquist sampling theo-
rem. On the other hand, CS theory has provided a sub-Nyquist
9
sampling approach to efficiently tackle the above-mentioned
challenges for these key 5G techniques. We have investigated
the exploitation of sparsity in key 5G techniques from three
technical directions and four typical models. Furthermore, we
have discussed a range of open problems and future research
directions from the perspective of CS theory. The theoretical
research on CS-based next generation communication tech-
nologies has made substantial progress, but its applications
in practical systems still have to be further investigated.
CS algorithms exhibiting reduced complexity and increased
reliability, as well as compatibility with the current systems
and hardware platforms constitute promising potential future
directions. It may be anticipated that CS will play a critical
role in the design of future wireless networks.
Hence our hope is that you valued colleague might like to
join this community-effort.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Agiwal, A. Roy, and N. Saxena, “Next generation 5G wireless
networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tut., vol.
18, no. 3, pp. 1617-1655, 3rd Quart., 2016.
[2] Y. C. Eldar, Sampling Theory: Beyond Bandlimited Systems, Cambridge
University Press, Apr. 2015.
[3] Z. Gao, L. Dai, W. Dai, B. Shim, and Z. Wang, “Structured compressive
sensing based spatial-temporal channel estimation for FDD massive
MIMO,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 601-617, Feb. 2016.
[4] A. Liu, F. Zhu, and V. K. N. Lau, “Closed-loop autonomous pilot
and compressive CSIT feedback resource adaptation in multi-user FDD
massive MIMO systems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 65, no. 1,
pp. 173-183, Jan. 2017.
[5] Z. Gao, L. Dai, Z. Wang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Compressive-sensing-
based multiuser detector for the large-scale SM-MIMO uplink,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 8725-8730, Oct. 2016.
[6] L. Dai, B. Wang, Y. Yuan, S. Han, C-L I, and Z. Wang, “Non-orthogonal
multiple access for 5G: Solutions, challenges, opportunities, and future
research trends,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vo. 53, no. 9, pp. 74-81, Sep.
2015.
[7] Z. Qin, Y. Gao, M. Plumbley, and C. Parini, “Wideband spectrum
sensing on real-time signals at sub-Nyquist sampling rates in single and
cooperative multiple nodes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 64, no.
12, pp. 3106- 3117, Jun. 2016.
[8] Z. Qin, Y. Gao, and C. G. Parini, “Data-assisted low complexity
compressive spectrum sensing on real-time signals under sub-Nyquist
rate,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 1174-1185,
Feb. 2016.
[9] S. Gishkori, V. Lottici, and G. Leus, “Compressive sampling-based
multiple symbol differential detection for UWB communications,” IEEE
Trans. Wirelss Commun., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 3778-3790, Jul. 2014.
[10] X. Cheng, M. Wang, and Y. L. Guan, “Ultrawideband channel esti-
mation: A Bayesian compressive sensing strategy based on statistical
sparsity,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vo. 64, no. 5, pp. 1819-1832, May
2015.
[11] R. W. Heath, N. Gonzalez-Prelcic, S. Rangan, W. Roh, A. M. Sayeed,
“An overview of signal processing techniques for millimeter wave
MIMO systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 10, no. 3,
pp. 436-453, Apr. 2016.
[12] Z. Zhou, J. Fang, L. Yang, H. Li, Z. Chen, and R. S. Blum, “Low-
rank tensor decomposition-aided channel estimation for millimeter wave
MIMO-OFDM systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Area Commun. vol. 35, no. 7, pp.
1524-1538, Jul. 2017.
[13] N. Rajamohan, A. Joshi, and A. P. Kannu, “Joint block sparse signal
recovery problem and applications in LTE cell search,” IEEE Trans. Veh.
Technol., vo. 66, no. 2, pp. 1130-1143, Feb. 2017.
[14] J. Liu, A. Liu, V. K. N. Lau, “Compressive interference mitigation and
data recovery in cloud radio access networks with limited fronthaul,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 1437-1446, Mar. 2017.
[15] D. Jiang, L. Nie, Z. Lv, H. Song, “Spatio-temporal Kronecker com-
pressive sensing for traffic matrix recovery,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp.
3046-3053, Jul. 2016.
