Using Cross-Model EgoSupervision
to Learn Cooperative Basketball Intention
Gedas Bertasius
University of Pennsylvania
gberta@seas.upenn.edu
Jianbo Shi
University of Pennsylvania
jshi@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract
We present a first-person method for cooperative basket-
ball intention prediction: we predict with whom the cam-
era wearer will cooperate in the near future from unlabeled
first-person images. This is a challenging task that requires
inferring the camera wearer’s visual attention, and decod-
ing the social cues of other players. Our key observation
is that a first-person view provides strong cues to infer the
camera wearer’s momentary visual attention, and his/her
intentions. We exploit this observation by proposing a new
cross-model EgoSupervision learning scheme that allows
us to predict with whom the camera wearer will cooper-
ate in the near future, without using manually labeled in-
tention labels. Our cross-model EgoSupervision operates
by transforming the outputs of a pretrained pose-estimation
network, into pseudo ground truth labels, which are then
used as a supervisory signal to train a new network for a
cooperative intention task. We evaluate our method, and
show that it achieves similar or even better accuracy than
the fully supervised methods do.
1. Introduction
Consider a dynamic scene such as Figure 1, where you,
as the camera wearer, are playing basketball. You need to
make a decision with whom you will cooperate to maxi-
mize the overall benefit for your team. Looking ahead at
your teammates, you make a conscious decision and then
2-3 seconds afterwards you perform a cooperative action
such as passing the ball.
In a team sport such as basketball, an effective coopera-
tion among teammates is essential. Thus, in this paper, we
aim to investigate whether we can use a single first-person
image to infer with whom the camera wearer will cooperate
2-3 seconds from now? This is a challenging task because
predicting camera wearer’s cooperative intention requires
1) inferring his/her momentary visual attention, 2) decod-
ing dominant social signals expressed by other players who
want to cooperate, and 3) knowing who your teammates
are when the players are not wearing any team-specific uni-
First-Person  
Input Image
    Predicted Cooperative  
       Intention
     Ground Truth 
Cooperative Intention
Figure 1: With whom will I cooperate after 2-3 seconds?
Given an unlabeled set of first-person basketball images,
we predict with whom the camera wearer will cooperate 2
seconds from now. We refer to this problem as a cooperative
basketball intention prediction.
forms.
To make this problem even more challenging we ask
a question: “Can we infer cooperative basketball inten-
tion without manually labeled first-person data?”. Building
an unsupervised learning framework is important because
manually collecting basketball intention labels is a costly
and a time consuming process. In the context of a cooper-
ative basketball intention task, an annotator needs to have
highly specific basketball domain knowledge. Such a re-
quirement limits the scalability of the annotation process
because such annotators are difficult to find and costly to
employ.
However, we conjecture that we can learn cooperative
basketball intention in an unsupervised fashion by exploit-
ing the signal provided by the first-person camera. What
people see reflects how they are going to act. A first-
person camera placed on a basketball player’s head allows
1
ar
X
iv
:1
70
9.
01
63
0v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 5
 S
ep
 2
01
7
Pseudo Ground Truth
The FCN weights are fixedInput Image
Detected Pose Bounding BoxesMulti-Person Pose Estimation FCN 
             [Cao et al. 2017]
Cooperative Basketball 
         Intention FCN
EgoTransformer
Figure 2: The illustration of our cross-model EgoSupervision training scheme. As our base model we use a multi-person
pose estimation network from [6], which predicts 1) pose estimates of all people in a given first-person image and 2) the
bounding boxes around each person. Next, we feed these outputs to an EgoTransformer, which transforms them such that the
transformed output would approximately capture the camera wearer’s attention and intentions. Then, we use such transformed
output as a supervisory signal to train the network for our cooperative basketball intention task.
us to indirectly tap into that person’s mind and reason about
his/her internal state based on what the camera wearer sees.
To do so we propose a novel cross-model EgoSupervi-
sion learning scheme, which allows us to learn the camera
wearer’s intention without the manually labeled intention
data. Our cross-model EgoSupervision scheme works as
follows. First we transform the output of a pretrained pose-
estimation network such that it would approximately reflect
the camera wearer’s internal state such as his/her visual at-
tention and intentions. Then, we use such transformed out-
put as a supervisory signal to train another network for our
cooperative basketball intention task. We show that such a
learning scheme allows us to train our model without man-
ually annotated intention labels, and achieve similar or even
better results as the fully supervised methods do.
2. Related Work
First-Person Vision. In the past, most first-person meth-
ods have focused on first-person object detection [29, 10,
40, 15, 2], or activity recognition [44, 43, 38, 31, 35, 13].
Several methods have employed first-person videos to sum-
marize videos [29, 34] while recently the work in [46] pro-
posed to predict the camera wearer’s engagement detection
from first-person videos. The work in [14] used a group
of people wearing first-person cameras to infer their social
interactions such as monologues, dialogues, or discussions.
The method in [37] predicted physical forces experienced
by the camera wearer, while the work in [26] recognized
the activities performed in various extreme sports. Several
recent methods [36, 45] also predicted the camera wearer’s
movement trajectories. Finally, first-person cameras have
also been used for various robotics applications [41, 18]
In comparison to these prior methods, we propose a
novel cooperative basketball intention prediction task, that
allows us to study cooperative behaviors of the basketball
players. Furthermore, we note that these prior first-person
methods (except [26]) rely on manually annotated labels
for their respective tasks whether it would be an object-
detection, activity recognition, intention prediction or some
other task. Instead, in this work, we demonstrate that we can
solve a challenging cooperative basketball intention predic-
tion task without using annotated first-person intention la-
bels, which are time consuming and costly to obtain.
Knowledge Transfer across Models. With the intro-
duction of supervised CNN models [27], there has been a
lot of interest in adapting generic set of features [11] for
different tasks at hand [22, 3, 16, 47, 39, 42]. Recently,
generic image classification features were successfully used
for the tasks such as edge detection [3, 47], object detec-
tion [16, 39, 42], and semantic segmentation [4, 32, 33, 7].
More related to our work, a recent line of research inves-
tigated how to transfer knowledge across different models
by a combination of parameter updates [1, 12, 24], transfor-
mation learning [28, 17], network distillation [21] or cross-
model supervision [23, 19]. The most similar to our work
are the methods in [23, 19] that use cross-model supervision
to transfer knowledge from one model to another.
All of the above methods focus on the third-person data.
In contrast, we show how to exploit a first-person view to
solve a novel camera wearer’s cooperative intention predic-
tion task without using manually labeled first-person data.
3. Learning Cooperative Basketball Intention
The goal of our cooperative basketball intention task is to
predict with whom the camera wearer will cooperate in the
near future. Formally, we aim to learn a function g(Ii) that
takes a single first-person image Ii as an input and outputs
a per-pixel likelihood map, where each pixel indicates the
cooperation probability. Ideally, we would want such func-
tion to produce high probability values at pixels around the
person with whom the camera wearer will cooperate, and
low probability values around all the other pixels.
We implement g(Ii) via a fully convolutional neural net-
work based on the architecture of a multi-person pose esti-
mation network in [6]. Let y? denote a per-pixel mask that
is given to our network as a target label. We refer to y? as a
pseudo ground truth because we obtain it automatically in-
stead of relying on the manually annotated intention labels.
Then, we learn our cooperative basketball intention model
by optimizing the following cross-entropy loss objective:
L(i) = ?
N?
j=1
y?
(i)
j log gj(Ii) + (1? y?
(i)
j ) log (1? gj(Ii)) ,
(1)
where y?(i)j is the pseudo ground truth value of image Ii
at pixel j, gj(Ii) refers to our network’s output at pixel j,
and N denotes the number of pixels in an image. We now
explain how we obtain the pseudo ground truth data y?.
3.1. EgoTransformer
To construct a pseudo ground truth supervisory signal y?,
we transform the output of a pretrained multi-person pose
estimation network [6], such that it would approximately
capture the camera wearer’s internal state such as his/her vi-
sual attention, and intentions. We do so using our proposed
EgoTransformer scheme.
Let f(Ii) denote a pretrained fully convolutional net-
work from [6] that takes a first-person image as an input,
and outputs the 1) pose part estimates of every person in
an image, and 2) their bounding-box detections. We note
that the pretrained network f was never trained on any
first-person images. Then, formally, let B ? Rn×5 de-
note the bounding box of people detected by f . Each of
n detected bounding boxes is parameterized by 5 numbers
(x, y, h, w, c) denoting the top-left bounding-box coordi-
nates (x, y), the height h, and width w of the bounding
box, and its confidence value c. Additionally, let P ?
Rn×18×2 denote the predicted (x, y) locations of 18 pose
parts (see [6]) for each of n detected people.
Then our goal is to come up with a transformation func-
tion T (B(i), P (i)) that takes these two outputs and trans-
forms them into a per-pixel pseudo ground truth mask y?(i)
for our cooperative basketball intention prediction task.
First-Person RGB Pseudo GT Ground Truth
Figure 3: Qualitative comparison of the pseudo ground truth
labels obtained via an EgoTransformer versus the actual
ground truth. Note that while the pseudo ground truth is
not always correct (see the third row), in most cases, it suc-
cessfully assigns high values around the player with whom
the camera wearer will cooperate (see the first two rows).
We do so by exploiting three different characteristics en-
coded in a first-person view: 1) egocentric location prior, 2)
egocentric size prior, and 3) egocentric pose prior. All of
these characteristics can be used to reason about the camera
wearer’s internal state.
For instance, the location where another person is de-
tected in a first-person image can be used to assess how
likely the camera wearer is looking at that person [31, 2].
The size of another person in a first-person image can be
used to infer how far the camera wearer is from that per-
son, and hence, how likely will the camera wearer inter-
act with that person (the nearer the more likely). Finally,
most person-to-person interactions involve people looking
at each other, which imposes a certain pose prior. We can
then use such a pose prior to predict whether two people
will cooperate with each other in the near future based on
whether another person is looking at the camera wearer at
present.
We express our pseudo ground truth data y? using these
three characteristics using what we refer to as an EgoTrans-
former scheme:
y? =
[ n?
j=1
V (Bj , ?size(Bj)) · V (Bj , ?pose(Bj))
]
· ?loc(B)
(2)
where n denotes the number of detected bounding boxes
in a given image, Bj depicts a jth bounding box, V is a
function that takes two inputs: 1) a bounding boxBj , and 2)
a scalar value v, and outputs aH×W dimensional mask by
assigning every pixel inside this bounding box Bj to v, and
First-Person RGB Our Prediction Ground Truth First-Person RGB Our Prediction Ground Truth
Figure 4: The qualitative cooperative basketball intention prediction results. Despite not using any manually annotated
first-person labels during training, in most cases, our cross-model EgoSupervision method correctly predicts with whom the
camera wearer will cooperate (the first two rows). In the third row, we also illustrate two cases where our method fails to
produce correct predictions.
zeros to all the pixels outsideBj . Here,H andW depict the
height and the width of the original input image. Finally,
?size(Bj) ? R1×1 and ?pose(Bj) ? R1×1 are scalars that
capture the size and pose priors associated with a bounding
box Bj , while ?loc ? RH×W is a first-person location prior
of the same dimensions as the original input image.
Intuitively, the formulation above operates by first as-
signing a specific value to each of the detected bounding
boxes. This yields a H ×W dimensional prediction map
where every pixel that does not belong to any bounding
boxes is assigned a zero value. Then, this prediction map
is multiplied with the location prior ?loc ? RH×W (us-
ing elementwise multiplication). Finally, all the values are
normalized to be in range [0, 1], which produces our final
pseudo ground truth labels. We now explain each of the
components in more detail.
Egocentric Location Prior. The location of the camera
wearer’s visual attention is essential for inferring his/her co-
operative intentions. We know that a first-person camera is
aligned with the person’s head direction, and thus, it cap-
tures exactly what the camera wearer sees. As a result, the
way the camera wearer positions himself with respect to
other players affects the location where these players will
be mapped in a first-person image.
Instead of assuming any specific location a-priori (e.g. a
center prior), as is done in [31, 29], we find the egocentric
location prior directly from the data. As before, Let B ?
Rn×5 denote the bounding boxes detected by a pretrained
network. Then we can compute ?loc ? RH×W as follows:
?loc(B) =
n?
j=1
V (B
(i)
j , c
(i)
j ) ·
1
N
N?
i=1
n?
j=1
V (B
(i)
j , c
(i)
j ))
where c(i)j is the predicted confidence of the j
th bound-
ing box in the ith image. Intuitively, the first term?n
j=1 V (Bj , c
(i)
j ) depicts a H × W dimensional mask
that is obtained by assigning confidence values to all pix-
els in their respective bounding boxes in the current im-
age, and zero values to the pixels outside the bounding
boxes. The second term 1N
?N
i=1
?n
j=1 V (Bj , c
(i)
j )) also
depicts a H × W dimensional mask that is obtained us-
ing this same procedure but across the entire training train-
ing dataset rather than a single image. In other words, the
second term captures the locations in a first-person image
where the bounding box predictions are usually most dense.
We conjecture, that ?loc(Ii) can then be used to approx-
imate the camera wearer’s visual attention location, which
is essential for inferring the camera wearer’s cooperative in-
tentions.
Egocentric Size Prior. Spatial 3D cues provides im-
portant information to infer the camera wearer’s inten-
tions [36, 45]. For instance, the camera wearer is more
likely to cooperate with a player who is near him/her. We
propose to capture this intuition, by exploiting an egocentric
size prior. We know that the size of a bounding box in a first-
person image is inversely related to the distance between the
camera wearer and the person in the bounding box. Thus,
let hj be the height of the bounding box Bj . Then we ex-
press the egocentric size prior ?size(Bj) ? R1×1 for a given
bounding box as:
?size(Bj) = exp (?
?
hj
)
where ? denotes a hyperparameter controlling how much
to penalize small bounding boxes. Such a formulation al-
First-Person RGB Subject-1 Subject-2 Subject-3 Subject-5 Ground Truth
Figure 5: Several qualitative examples from the top 4 performing subjects in our conducted human study. Each subject
specified their prediction by clicking on the person, with whom he/she thought the camera wearer was going to cooperate.
We then placed a fixed size Gaussian around the location of the click. Note that based on these results, we can conclude that
some instances of this task are quite difficult even for humans, i.e. in these examples, there is no general consensus among
the subjects’ responses.
lows us to capture the intuition that the camera wearer is
more likely to cooperate with players who are physically
closer to him/her.
Egocentric Pose Prior. In basketball, people tend to
look at each other to express their intentions before actu-
ally performing cooperative actions. Detecting whether a
particular person is facing the camera wearer can be eas-
ily done by examining the x coordinates of the paired body
parts such as eyes, arms, legs, etc of a person detected in
a first-person image. For instance, if a particular person is
facing the camera wearer then, we will observe that for most
of his/her paired parts visible in a first-person image the fol-
lowing will be true: x(right_part) < x(left_part). In
other words, the right parts of that person’s body will have
smaller x coordinate value in a first-person image, than the
left parts. We use this intuition to encode the egocentric
pose prior ?pose(Bj) ? R1×1 for a given bounding box Bj
as follows:
?pose(Bj) =
1
|P|
?
p?P
1{x(right_part) < x(left_part)}
where P is the set of all paired parts, and
1{x(right_part) < x(left_part)} is an indicator
function that returns 1 if the x coordinate of the right part
in a first-person image is smaller than the x coordinate of
the left part. The computed value ?pose(Bj) can then be
viewed as a confidence that a person in the bounding box
Bj is facing the camera wearer, which is an important cue
for inferring the camera wearer’s cooperative intentions.
Pseudo Ground Truth. We then combine all the above
discussed components into a unified framework using the
Equation 2. Such a formulation allows us to automatically
construct pseudo ground truth labels from the outputs of a
pretrained multi-person pose estimation network. We illus-
trate several examples of our obtained pseudo ground truth
labels in Figure 3. Notice that while our computed pseudo
ground truth is not always correct, in many cases it correctly
captures the player with whom the camera wearer will coop-
erate in the near future. In our experimental section, we will
demonstrate that despite the imperfections of our pseudo
ground truth labels, we can use them to obtain a model that
is almost as good as the model trained in a fully supervised
fashion using manually annotated cooperation labels.
3.2. Cross-Model EgoSupervision
After obtaining the pseudo ground truth data y?, we train
our cooperative basketball intention FCN using the cross-
model EgoSupervision scheme as shown in Figure 2. We
employ a multi-person pose estimation network from [6] as
our base model, which is used to predict the 1) pose esti-
mates of all people in a given image and 2) their bounding
boxes. The parameters inside the base network are fixed
throughout the entire training procedure. At each iteration,
the outputs from the base network are fed to the EgoTrans-
former, which transforms them into the pseudo ground truth
cooperate intention labels. These pseudo ground truth la-
bels are then used as a supervisory signal to train our co-
operative basketball intention FCN using a sigmoid cross
entropy per-pixel loss as illustrated in Equation 1.
3.3. Implementation Details
For all of our experiments, we used a Caffe deep learn-
ing library [25]. As our base FCN model we used a multi-
person pose estimation network from [6]. Inspired by the
success of this method, we also used the same architec-
ture for our cooperative basketball intention FCN. During
training, we optimized the network for 5000 iterations with
a learning rate of 10?7, the momentum equal to 0.9, the
weight decay of 0.0005, and the batch size of 15. The
weights inside the base FCN network were fixed through-
out the entire training procedure. To compute the egocentric
Human Subjects Accuracy
Subject-4 0.802
Subject-2 0.895
Subject-3 0.901
Subject-5 0.904
Subject-1 0.927
Table 1: Quantitative human study results on our coopera-
tive basketball intention task. We ask 5 subjects to predict
a player in the first-person image, with whom they think
the camera wearer will cooperate after 2 seconds. We then
compute the accuracy as the fraction of correct responses.
The results indicate that most subjects achieve the accuracy
of about 90%. We conjecture that Subject-4 may be less
familiar with the basketball game thus, the lower accuracy.
size prior mask we used ? = 10.
4. Cooperative Basketball Intention Dataset
We build upon the dataset from [5], which captures first-
person basketball videos of 48 distinct college-level players
in an unscripted basketball game. The work in [5] studies a
basketball performance assessment problem, and provides
401 training and 343 testing examples of basketball cooper-
ations among players from 10.3 hours of videos.
To obtain ground truth labels corresponding to the spe-
cific players, with whom the camera wearer cooperated, we
look at the video segments corresponding to all such coop-
eration. We then identify the player with whom the camera
wearer cooperated, go back to the frame about 2 seconds
before the cooperation happens, and label that player with
a bounding box. The ground truth data is then generated by
placing a Gaussian inside the bounding box, according to
the height and width of the bounding box.
Once again we note that these labels are only used for the
evaluation purposes, and also to train other baseline models.
In comparison, our method learns to detect the players with
whom the camera wearer will cooperate, without relying on
manually annotated intention labels.
5. Experimental Results
In this section, we present quantitative and qualitative
results for our cooperative basketball intention prediction
task. To compute the accuracy of each method, we select the
player in the image with the maximum predicted probability
as the the final prediction and then compute the fraction of
all the correct predictions across the entire testing dataset.
5.1. Human Study
First, to see how well humans can predict cooperative
basketball intention from first-person images, we conduct a
human study consisting of 5 human subjects. Each subject
Method Accuracy
DCL [30] 0.222
MPP-pretrained [6] 0.586
DeepLab‡ [9] 0.644
Pseudo GT 0.665
ResNet-50‡ [20] 0.675
PSPNet‡ [48] 0.695
ResNet-101‡ [20] 0.706
DeepLab-v2‡ [8] 0.757
MPP-finetuned‡ [6] 0.778
CMES 0.775
Table 2: The quantitative cooperative basketball inten-
tion results evaluated as the fraction of correct predictions.
We compare our Cross-Model EgoSupervision (CMES)
scheme with a variety of supervised methods (marked by
‡). These results indicate that even without using manually
annotated intention labels, our method outperforms most
supervised methods, and produces almost identical perfor-
mance as our main baseline “MPP-finetuned”.
is shown 343 testing images one at a time, and asked to
click on the player in an image, with whom he/she thinks
the camera wearer will cooperate 2 seconds from now. Then
the accuracy of each subject is evaluated as the fraction of
correct responses.
We present these results in Table 1, and demonstrate that
this task is not trivial even for humans: most of the subjects
achieve about 90% accuracy on our task, which is solid but
not perfect. We also point out that we did not collect in-
formation on how familiar each subject was with basket-
ball. However, based on the results, we conjecture that
Subject-4 who achieved almost 10% lower accuracy than
the other subjects was probably not very familiar with bas-
ketball, which contributed to his lower performance. In Fig-
ure 5, we also visualize the qualitative examples that human
subjects found the most difficult, i.e. in these instances, the
predictions among the subjects differed substantially.
5.2. Quantitative Results
In Table 2, we present quantitative cooperative basket-
ball intention results of our method and several other base-
lines. As our baselines, we use a collection of meth-
ods that were successfully used for other computer vi-
sion tasks such as image classification, semantic segmen-
tation or saliency detection. These include a 1) Deep Con-
trast Saliency (DCL) method [30], 2-3) several variations
of highly successful DeepLab semantic segmentation sys-
tems [9, 8] adapted to our task, 4-5) image classification
ResNets [20] adapted to our task, 6) one of the top perform-
ing semantic segmentation systems PSPNet [48], 7-8) a pre-
trained and finetuned multi-person pose estimation (MPP)
network [6], and 9) a pseudo ground truth obtained from
Accuracy
Method pseudo GT Trained Model
no ?loc 0.481 0.560
no ?pose 0.557 0.694
no ?size 0.571 0.731
Ours-Full 0.665 0.775
Table 3: The quantitative ablation studies documenting
the importance of each component in our EgoTransformer
scheme. We separately remove each of ?loc, ?size, ?pose
and investigate how the accuracy changes. The second col-
umn in the table denotes the accuracy of a pseudo ground
truth, while the third column depicts the accuracy of our
trained model. Based on these results, we can conclude that
each component of our EgoTransformer is essential for an
accurate cooperative basketball intention prediction.
our EgoTransformer.
Note that our Cross-Model EgoSupervision (CMES)
method is based on an MPP network architecture [6], and
thus, as our main baseline we use the “MPP-finetuned”
method, which uses the manually labeled bounding box in-
tention labels to infer with whom the camera wearer will
interact. In contrast to this baseline, our CMES method is
only trained on the automatically generated pseudo ground
truth labels. We note that the supervised methods employ-
ing manually labeled data are marked with ‡. We now dis-
cuss several interesting observations based on these results.
Comparison with the Supervised Methods. Based on
the results, we observe that despite not using manually an-
notated bounding box intention labels, our method outper-
forms a number of supervised baselines and achieves almost
equivalent results to our main baseline “MPP-finetuned”,
which was trained using manually annotated cooperative in-
tention labels. Thus, these results indicatee the effectiveness
of our cross-model EgoSupervision scheme.
Comparison with the Pseudo Ground Truth. One in-
teresting and a bit surprising observation from Table 2, is
that our cross-model EgoSupervision model achieves sub-
stantially better accuracy than the pseudo ground truth,
which was used to optimize our model. We conjecture
that this happens due to the following reasons. The pseudo
ground truth labels are constructed using three different sig-
nals: 1) an egocentric location prior, 2) an egocentric size
prior, and 3) an egocentric pose prior. Note, that our con-
structed pseudo ground truth does not incorporate any vi-
sual appearance information, i.e. it does not consider how
the players look like. In contrast, during training, our net-
work, learns what are the visual appearance cues indicative
of the players with high pseudo ground truth values. Ar-
guably, such visual cues provide a stronger signal for a co-
operative intention recognition, which then leads to a sub-
stantially better performance than the pseudo ground truth
labels.
First-Person RGB FCN Activations Ground Truth
Figure 6: The visualization of the activation values inside
the second to last layer in our trained network. Note that the
network produces high activation values around the faces
of the players in the camera wearer’s field of view. This
makes intuitive sense, as facial expressions provide the most
informative cues for a cooperative basketball intention task.
5.3. Qualitative Results
In Figure 4, we present our qualitative results, where we
show that in most cases, our model successfully learns to
predict with whom the camera wearer will cooperate. Fur-
thermore, to gain a better understanding of what the net-
work learned, in Figure 6, we visualize the activations in-
side the second to last FCN’s layer. Note that our network
has high activation values around the faces of people with
whom the camera wearer intends to cooperate. This makes
intuitive sense, as face is probably the most useful cue to
recognize the camera wearer’s intention to cooperate.
5.4. Ablation Experiments
In Table 3, we present the results analyzing the behavior
of our EgoTransformer scheme. Earlier we discussed that
to implement our EgoTransformer scheme we exploit three
characteristics: 1) egocentric location prior ?loc , 2) egocen-
tric size prior ?size , and 3) egocentric pose prior ?pose. We
want to investigate how much each of these priors affect 1)
the quality of our generated pseudo ground truth data, and 2)
the quality of our model trained using such pseudo ground
truth. To do this, we run experiments with three baselines
where for each baseline we remove one of ?loc, ?size, or
?pose components. We denote these three baselines as “no
?loc”, “no ?size” and “no ?pose” respectively. Finally, we
include the results of our model using the full EgoTrans-
former scheme.
Based on the results in Table 3, we first observe that each
of these components have a significant impact to the quality
of pseudo ground truth that we obtain. Specifically, using
our full model yields 9.4% better pseudo ground truth re-
sults than the second best baseline. Additionally, note that
the network trained to the pseudo ground truth of our full
model achieves 4.4% higher accuracy than the second best
baseline. These results indicate that each component in our
EgoTransformer scheme is crucial for learning a high qual-
ity cooperative intention model.
6. Conclusions
In this work, we present a new task of predicting coop-
erative basketball intention from a single first-person im-
age. We demonstrate that a first-person image provides
strong cues to infer the camera wearer’s intentions based
on what he/she sees. We use this observation to design a
new cross-model EgoSupervision learning scheme that al-
lows us to predict with whom the camera wearer will coop-
erate, without using manually labeled intention labels. We
demonstrate that despite not using such labels, our method
achieves similar or even better results than fully supervised
methods.
We believe that our proposed cross-model EgoSupervi-
sion scheme could be applied on various other first-person
vision tasks without the need to manually collect labels for
each of such tasks. In the long run, a learning scheme such
as ours could effectively replace the supervised methods,
which require costly and time consuming annotation pro-
cess.
References
[1] Y. Aytar and A. Zisserman. Tabula rasa: Model transfer for object
category detection. In IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2011. 2
[2] Gedas Bertasius, Hyun Soo Park, Stella X. Yu, and Jianbo Shi.
First-person action-object detection with egonet. In Proceedings of
Robotics: Science and Systems, July 2017. 2, 3
[3] Gedas Bertasius, Jianbo Shi, and Lorenzo Torresani. Deepedge: A
multi-scale bifurcated deep network for top-down contour detection.
In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR), June 2015. 2
[4] Gedas Bertasius, Jianbo Shi, and Lorenzo Torresani. Semantic seg-
mentation with boundary neural fields. In The IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016. 2
[5] Gedas Bertasius, Stella X. Yu, Hyun Soo Park, and Jianbo Shi.
Am I a baller? basketball performance assessment from first-person
videos. CoRR, abs/1611.05365, 2016. 6
[6] Zhe Cao, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and Yaser Sheikh. Realtime
multi-person 2d pose estimation using part affinity fields. CoRR,
abs/1611.08050, 2016. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7
[7] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin
Murphy, and Alan L. Yuille. Semantic image segmentation with deep
convolutional nets and fully connected crfs. In ICLR, 2015. 2
[8] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Iasonas Kokkinos, Kevin
Murphy, and Alan L Yuille. Deeplab: Semantic image segmentation
with deep convolutional nets, atrous convolution, and fully connected
crfs. arXiv:1606.00915, 2016. 6
[9] Liang-Chieh Chen, Yi Yang, Jiang Wang, Wei Xu, and Alan L.
Yuille. Attention to scale: Scale-aware semantic image segmenta-
tion. CVPR, 2016. 6
[10] Dima Damen, Teesid Leelasawassuk, Osian Haines, Andrew Calway,
and Walterio Mayol-Cuevas. You-do, i-learn: Discovering task rele-
vant objects and their modes of interaction from multi-user egocen-
tric video. In Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference.
BMVA Press, 2014. 2
[11] Jeff Donahue, Yangqing Jia, Oriol Vinyals, Judy Hoffman, Ning
Zhang, Eric Tzeng, and Trevor Darrell. Decaf: A deep convolu-
tional activation feature for generic visual recognition. In Interna-
tional Conference in Machine Learning (ICML), 2014. 2
[12] Lixin Duan, Dong Xu, and Ivor W. Tsang. Learning with augmented
features for heterogeneous domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 711–718, Ed-
inburgh, Scotland, June 2012. Omnipress. 2
[13] Alireza Fathi, Ali Farhadi, and James M. Rehg. Understanding ego-
centric activities. In ICCV. 2
[14] Alireza Fathi, Jessica K. Hodgins, and James M. Rehg. Social inter-
actions: A first-person perspective. 2
[15] Alireza Fathi, Xiaofeng Ren, and James M. Rehg. Learning to rec-
ognize objects in egocentric activities. In CVPR, pages 3281–3288.
IEEE Computer Society, 2011. 2
[16] Ross Girshick, Jeff Donahue, Trevor Darrell, and Jitendra Malik.
Rich feature hierarchies for accurate object detection and semantic
segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2014. 2
[17] Boqing Gong, Yuan Shi, Fei Sha, and Kristen Grauman. Geodesic
flow kernel for unsupervised domain adaptation. In 2012 IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Providence,
RI, USA, June 16-21, 2012, pages 2066–2073, 2012. 2
[18] Ilaria Gori, J. K. Aggarwal, and Michael S. Ryoo. Building uni-
fied human descriptors for multi-type activity recognition. CoRR,
abs/1507.02558, 2015. 2
[19] Saurabh Gupta, Judy Hoffman, and Jitendra Malik. Cross modal dis-
tillation for supervision transfer. In The IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016. 2
[20] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1512.03385, 2015. 6
[21] Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. Distilling the
knowledge in a neural network. CoRR, abs/1503.02531, 2015. 2
[22] Judy Hoffman, Sergio Guadarrama, Eric S Tzeng, Ronghang Hu,
Jeff Donahue, Ross Girshick, Trevor Darrell, and Kate Saenko.
Lsda: Large scale detection through adaptation. In Z. Ghahramani,
M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. D. Lawrence, and K. Q. Weinberger, edi-
tors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 27, pages
3536–3544. Curran Associates, Inc., 2014. 2
[23] Judy Hoffman, Saurabh Gupta, and Trevor Darrell. Learning with
side information through modality hallucination. In The IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June
2016. 2
[24] Judy Hoffman, Erik Rodner, Jeff Donahue, Kate Saenko, and Trevor
Darrell. Efficient learning of domain-invariant image representa-
tions. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2013. 2
[25] Yangqing Jia, Evan Shelhamer, Jeff Donahue, Sergey Karayev,
Jonathan Long, Ross Girshick, Sergio Guadarrama, and Trevor Dar-
rell. Caffe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding.
arXiv:1408.5093, 2014. 5
[26] Kris Makoto Kitani, Takahiro Okabe, Yoichi Sato, and Akihiro Sug-
imoto. Fast unsupervised ego-action learning for first-person sports
videos. In CVPR, 2011. 2
[27] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Imagenet
classification with deep convolutional neural networks. In NIPS.
2012. 2
[28] B. Kulis, K. Saenko, and T. Darrell. What you saw is not what you
get: Domain adaptation using asymmetric kernel transforms. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2011 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, CVPR ’11, pages 1785–1792, 2011. 2
[29] Yong Jae Lee and Kristen Grauman. Predicting important objects for
egocentric video summarization. IJCV, 2015. 2, 4
[30] G. Li and Y. Yu. Deep contrast learning for salient object detection.
In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 478–487, June 2016. 6
[31] Yin Li, Zhefan Ye, and James M. Rehg. Delving into egocentric
actions. In CVPR. 2, 3, 4
[32] Guosheng Lin, Chunhua Shen, Ian D. Reid, and Anton van den Hen-
gel. Efficient piecewise training of deep structured models for se-
mantic segmentation. CoRR, abs/1504.01013, 2015. 2
[33] Jonathan Long, Evan Shelhamer, and Trevor Darrell. Fully convolu-
tional networks for semantic segmentation. CoRR, 2014. 2
[34] Zheng Lu and Kristen Grauman. Story-driven summarization for
egocentric video. In CVPR, 2013. 2
[35] Kris Kitani Minghuang Ma. Going deeper into first-person activity
recognition. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR), 2016. 2
[36] Hyun Soo Park, Jyh-Jing Hwang, Yedong Niu, and Jianbo Shi. Ego-
centric future localization. In CVPR, 2016. 2, 4
[37] Hyun Soo Park, Jyh-Jing Hwang, and Jianbo Shi. Force from motion:
Decoding physical sensation from a first person video. In CVPR,
2016. 2
[38] Hamed Pirsiavash and Deva Ramanan. Detecting activities of daily
living in first-person camera views. In CVPR, 2012. 2
[39] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster R-
CNN: Towards real-time object detection with region proposal net-
works. In Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2015. 2
[40] Xiaofeng Ren and Chunhui Gu. Figure-ground segmentation im-
proves handled object recognition in egocentric video. In CVPR,
2010. 2
[41] M. S. Ryoo, Thomas J. Fuchs, Lu Xia, J.K. Aggarwal, and Larry
Matthies. Robot-centric activity prediction from first-person videos:
What will they do to me? In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction,
HRI ’15, pages 295–302, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM. 2
[42] Pierre Sermanet, David Eigen, Xiang Zhang, Michael Mathieu,
Rob Fergus, and Yann Lecun. Overfeat: Integrated recog-
nition, localization and detection using convolutional networks.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6229. 2
[43] Suriya Singh, Chetan Arora, and C. V. Jawahar. First person action
recognition using deep learned descriptors. In The IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016. 2
[44] Bilge Soran, Ali Farhadi, and Linda Shapiro. Action Recognition in
the Presence of One Egocentric and Multiple Static Cameras. 2015.
2
[45] Shan Su, Jung Pyo Hong, Jianbo Shi, and Hyun Soo Park. Predicting
behaviors of basketball players from first person videos. In CVPR,
2017. 2, 4
[46] Yu-Chuan Su and Kristen Grauman. Detecting engagement in ego-
centric video. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
2016. 2
[47] Saining Xie and Zhuowen Tu. Holistically-nested edge detection. In
ICCV, 2015. 2
[48] Hengshuang Zhao, Jianping Shi, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaogang Wang, and
Jiaya Jia. Pyramid scene parsing network. CoRR, abs/1612.01105,
2016. 6
