ar
X
iv
:1
70
9.
00
90
7v
1 
 [
q-
bi
o.
Q
M
] 
 4
 S
ep
 2
01
7
1
CSSTag: Optical Nanoscale Radar and Particle
Tracking for In-Body and Microfluidic Systems with
Vibrating Graphene and Resonance Energy Transfer
Burhan Gulbahar, Senior Member, IEEE and Gorkem Memisoglu, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Single particle tracking systems monitor cellular
processes with great accuracy in nano-biological systems. The
emissions of the fluorescent molecules are detected with cameras
or photodetectors. However, state-of-the-art imaging systems have
challenges in the detection capability, collection and analysis
of imaging data, penetration depth and complicated set-ups.
In this article, a signaling based nanoscale acousto-optic radar
and microfluidic particle tracking system is proposed based on
the theoretical design providing nanoscale optical modulator
with vibrating Fo?rster resonance energy transfer (VFRET) and
vibrating CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (QDs) on graphene resonators.
The modulator structure combines the significant advantages of
graphene membranes having wideband resonance frequencies
with QDs having broad absorption spectrum and tunable prop-
erties. The solution denoted by chirp spread spectrum (CSS)
Tag (CSSTag) utilizes classical radar target tracking approaches
in nanoscale environments based on the capability to generate
CSS sequences to identify different bio-particles. Numerical and
Monte-Carlo simulations are realized showing the significant per-
formance for multiple particle tracking (MPT) with a modulator
of 10µm × 10µm × 10µm dimension and several picograms of
weight, signal to noise ratio (SNR) in the range ?7 dB to 10 dB
and high speed tracking capability for microfluidic and in-body
environments.
Index Terms—Acousto-optic modulator, chirp spread spec-
trum, graphene resonator, single particle tracking, tagging,
nanoscale radar, vibrating Fo?rster resonance energy transfer.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
INGLE particle tracking (SPT) allows observa-
tion of dynamic behaviours of biological parti-
cles with precision better than the diffraction limit
of light [1]. Special fluorescing tags attached on
the molecules are tracked and the digital image
processing tools allow nanometer (nm) resolution
in positioning. Image processing methods and al-
gorithms are developed in significantly many stud-
ies for particle and cell tracking in microscopic
platforms [2], [3], [4]. However, the tags do not
have signaling capability to support a signaling
based tracking compared with traditional imaging
Dr. Burhan Gulbahar is with the Department of Electrical and
Electronics Engineering and Applied Research Center of Technology
Products, Ozyegin University, Istanbul, 34794, Turkey, (e-mail:
burhan.gulbahar@ozyegin.edu.tr). Dr. Gorkem Memisoglu is with
the Research Group in Vestel Electronics, Manisa, Turkey, (e-mail:
gorkem.memisoglu@vestel.com.tr).
based tracking systems, e.g., fluorescence lifetime
imaging for cell tracking with near infrared emissive
polymersomes in [5]. In this article, the existing
imaging based particle tracking methods are, for
the first time, improved with a special theoretical
design of nanoscale optical radar architecture de-
noted by CSSTag generating chirp spread spectrum
(CSS) modulation by utilizing a recently introduced
nanoscale optical modulation mechanism in [6], [7],
[8], [9] defining vibrating Fo?rster resonance energy
transfer (VFRET) of CdSe/ZnS quantum dots (QDs)
on graphene membranes. The proposed system al-
lows to utilize the classical radio frequency (RF)
radar target tracking tools in nanoscale regime for
optical signals to track nanoscale and microscale bi-
ological units. It provides a basic tool and capability
for nanoscale tagging, identification and multiple
particle tracking (MPT) applications.
State-of-the-art optical imaging based SPT sys-
tems suffer from problems due to resolution, de-
tection speed and multiple cell discrimination in
a highly complex cellular topology preventing to
get accurate imaging [1]. On the other hand, the
collection of high resolution data and their fast
analysis are highly costly for large numbers of par-
ticles requiring artificial intelligence based pattern
recognition systems. In this article, the imaging
capabilities are improved with a signaling based
architecture by providing simplicity, the capabilities
of classical radar algorithms, the biocompatibility of
graphene and low complexity MPT architecture.
Optical tracking systems promise label free di-
agnostics such as single particle interferometric re-
flectance imaging sensor in [11], optofluidic intra-
cavity spectroscopy technique spectrally discrimi-
nating single biological cells in [12] and 2-D op-
tical scanner for imaging up-converting phosphor
labels in immunoassays in [13]. In [14], optical
time-stretch ultrafast imaging is proposed to read
2
Fig. 1. CSSTag: a nano-biological multiple particle tracking system by utilizing TDOA and CSS based tracking and identification.
barcodes within nanoseconds while requiring spec-
trally structured active illumination. CSSTag can be
utilized in full compatibility with the high speed
fluorescence microscopy and tracking systems by
generating optical tags to be detected by these
systems. In addition, point-like excitation of flu-
orescing molecules requires focusing laser beams
as a challenge for large number of particles [10].
The problems related to the laser sources, compli-
cated set-ups and low imaging penetration depth
are solved with LED sources positioned freely in
the microfluidic environment. Besides that available
image processing methods can be used with CSSTag
to improve their performances. For example, in
[2], significant challlenges are emphasized for low
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) spot detection in flu-
orescence microscopy which can be experimented
with CSSTag. Heavy noise and background intensity
changes are handled with random finite set Bayesian
filtering for time-lapse cell microscopy in [3]. An
automatic tracker with a Bayesian probabilistic
framework is proposed in [4]. CSSTag improves
the proposed methods by providing time-varying
spread spectrum signaling capability. Manufactur-
ing and experimenting CSSTag system are left as
future works. The theoretical design and simulation
performance presented in this article support future
efforts to realize experimental prototype.
In this article, an acousto-optic nanoscale radar
system design shown in Fig. 1 is proposed by
utilizing the recently introduced VFRET mechanism
in [6] to generate CSS sequences with resistance
to Doppler effects and higher interference rejection
capability [15]. The modulator combines the advan-
tages of graphene membranes with ultra-low weight,
high Young’s modulus, strength and wideband res-
onance frequencies and QDs with broad absorption
spectrum, large absorption cross-sections, tunable
emission spectra, size dependent emission wave-
length, high photochemical stability and improved
quantum yield. The hybrid structure converts the
acoustic excitation to the periodic optical signals
detected by photodetector arrays without requiring
high resolution camera or high illumination power.
SPT is achieved with time difference of arrival
(TDOA) based hybrid system while TF modulation
based radar signaling mechanism is brought into
the nanoscale regime for MPT.
In this work, the novel contributions, achieved for
the first time, are listed as follows:
• A nanoscale optical communications modulator
converting acoustic excitations to optical emis-
sions utilizing CdSe/ZnS QDs and vibrating
graphene membranes, and a novel mechanical
design for acousto-optic frequency multiplica-
tion and optical CSS sequence generation.
• A nanoscale optical radar with low compu-
tational complexity and high speed tracking
capability with the large numbers of particles
and operation with low level of light sources
without spatial alignment.
• A tagging system improving the state-of-the-
art fluorescence imaging based tracking systems
with optical signaling tags in a compatible de-
sign to be utilized in these systems with the
extended capabilities for diagnostic microfluidic
and in-body applications such as cell identifica-
tion, cytometry and cellular imaging.
3
• Numerical and Monte-Carlo simulations for
two particle tracking experiment with microm-
eter size modulators having weights of several
picograms and low level of excitation sources
compared with laser sources showing high per-
formance with low SNR values between ?7 dB
and 10 dB.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section II, VFRET system model is sum-
marized while the device structure and fabrication
are described in Section III. In Section IV, CSS
sequence generation is modeled and CSSTag MPT
mechanism is introduced. Then, in Section V, the
challenges are discussed. The numerical and Monte-
Carlo simulations are presented in Section VI while
the conclusions are given in Section VII.
II. VIBRATING FRET MODELING
Doubly clamped single layer graphene (SLG)
beams are modeled with the resonance frequency
of fr = (1/ 2Lg)
?
FT / (?g Wg) under a specific
strain level Sm (%) due to applied periodic exci-
tation sound pressure where FT is the pre-tension
in (N/m) and, Lg, Wg and ?g are the length,
width and the mass density of the resonator, re-
spectively [6], [16]. The resonance frequency in a
fluid medium compared with the models defined
for the vacuum is assumed to be approximated by
fw = fr /
?
1 + ?w ?w Lg / (?g hg) where ?w is a
constant factor, ?w is the mass density of the fluid
medium and hg is the graphene membrane thick-
ness [17]. Furthermore, the resulting resonance fre-
quency f0 due to the QD load on the graphene drum
is approximated by f0 = fw
(
1 ? |?m|/ (2md)
)
where md is the mass of the graphene drum and
|?m| is the load on the drum. Tp ? 1/f0 denotes
the time period of the resonator [6]. Then, the
number of photons emitted in VFRET mechanism
introduced in [6] for low power excitations and
the rates smaller than lifetime limited maximum is
modeled as follows:
NFRET =
ID DB ?D ?A EFRET ND ?t
hp f
a
D
(1)
where ID is the light intensity in (W/m
2/nm) for
donor excitation, DB is the bandwidth of donor
excitation in (nm), ?D = Dext 3.825 10
?25 is the
absorption cross section of donor excitation in
(m2), Dext is the donor extinction coefficient in
(M?1 cm?1), ?A is the quantum yield of accep-
tors, ND is the number of donor molecules, ?t is
the photon counting time set to larger than tD +
tFRET + tA which is the total time on the order of
nanoseconds for photon emissions from the acceptor
including the donor excitation time tD, FRET
time tFRET and the acceptor emission life time tA,
faD = c / ?
a
D is the donor excitation frequency, ?
a
D
is the donor excitation wavelength, hp = 6.62 10
?34
(J× s) is Planck’s constant and c = 3 108 m/s is the
velocity of light. tFRET is much smaller compared
with tA and ?t is set to 2×tA to obtain an averaging
behavior for the exponential decay profile of the
emission, blinking, flickering and Poisson statistics
of photon arrivals [18]. FRET efficiency EFRET is
defined as EFRET = kA R
6
0 / (d
6
FRET + kA R
6
0)
where kA is the number of acceptors per donor,
dFRET and R0 are the donor-acceptor and Fo?rster
distances, respectively [6]. The acoustic excitations
due to sound pressure levels on graphene membrane
are converted to optical emissions due to FRET
mechanism between the donor cluster attached on
graphene and the acceptor at a fixed position. The
generated light intensity has the same period of the
acoustic resonance while the intensity of excitation
is tunable with the number of donors and acceptors,
the resonance frequency, thickness of the graphene
layer (hg) and the strain level (Sm) by the sound
pressure as discussed in detail in [6]. In this article,
SLG is utilized to create a multi-layer modulator
structure with ultra-light weight properties. Next,
the model defined in [6] is significantly improved
to realize optical frequency modulation (FM), fre-
quency multiplier and CSS sequence generation.
III. ACOUSTO-OPTIC FM MODULATOR AND MULTIPLIER
The novel acousto-optic modulator structure with
acousto-optic frequency multiplication capability is
shown in Fig. 2. Next, the properties of the device
are explored by specifying the effects of dynamic
Fo?rster radius, the diversity combining architecture
and VFRET multiplier emission modeling.
A. Dynamic Fo?rster Radius
The dynamic Fo?rster radius modeled with
R60,l,j(t) = R
6
0 ?
2
l,j(t) due to periodic oscillation of
the donor molecules depends on the relative orien-
tation of the donor and the acceptor (shown in red)
as the donor resonates along the acceptor building
4
Fig. 2. Single unit of the frequency multiplier structure with (a) side view, (b) front view and (c) the multi-unit diversity in a stacked architecture which are
extended and modified versions of the simple units defined in [6], [7], [8], [9].
as shown in Fig. 2 where ?2l,j(t) =
(
cos ?DAl,j (t) ?
3 cos ?Dl,j(t) cos ?
A
l,j(t)
)2
for the donor-acceptor (D-
A) pairs on the lth and jth layers, respectively, R0
is the reference Fo?rster distance measurement for
D-A pairs at the same positions with respect to
y and z axes [19]. The angle ?DAl,j (t) is assumed
to be zero for the D-A pairs at the same position
in the y-axis. dA and dD denote the inter-layer
distances between the acceptor and the donor layers,
respectively, where dAD is the fixed distance in
the x-axis between the groups of the acceptor and
the donor layers. The angle ?Dl,j(t) = ? ? ?
A
l,j(t)
is calculated as tan?1(|j dA ? yl(t)| / dAD) for the
current position yl(t) of the resonating lth graphene
layer. ?2j(t) is changing between one and four from
the long distance to the direct coupling case in
the close neighborhood. Next, the stacked device
structure with a transmitter diversity is presented.
B. Transmitter Diversity with the Stacked Resonators
The single unit device shown in Fig. 2(a) has total
number of 2×Nl,A + 1 and 2×Nl,D + 1 layers of
acceptors and donors, respectively, and the donor
and acceptor layers have the layer indices in the in-
tervals [?Nl,A, Nl,A] and [?Nl,D, Nl,D], respectively.
It is assumed that the vertical positions of the donor
and acceptor layers with the index zero are the
same in the z-axis at stable conditions without any
resonance. The diversity combining stacked device
volume is assumed to be hT ×WT ×LT where hT ,
WT and LT are the height, width and the length
of the multiplier device composed of the stacked
unit resonator blocks as shown in Fig. 2(c). Nl,A
is determined with respect to the maximum strain
in order to create a homogeneous light emission
among different acceptor layers since the layers at
the highest and lowest vertical positions experience
different coupling with the boundary layer donors.
The homogeneity is satisfied by allowing the donor
layers at the highest and lowest vertical positions
to have a separation distance to the closest accep-
tor layer equal to the maximum amplitude of the
vertical resonance amplitude, i.e., A, as follows:
Nl,A = (hT ? 2A) / (2 dA) (2)
where dA ? k?AR0 depends on the predefined
constant k?A and larger than RA + hf , RA is the
acceptor QD diameter and hf ? dA is the thickness
of the rigid and non-resonating structure that the
acceptors reside in. Nl,D is set to hT / (2 dD) where
dD ? k?DR0 is chosen larger than hg + RD + d?
by tuning the variable k?D where RD is the donor
QD diameter. The extra factor d? is the maximum
vertical displacement due to the phase difference of
the excitation between neighbor layers, i.e., d? ?
max
t
{A sin(?0 t+2 ? dD / ?e)?A sin(?0 t)} where
?e = ve / f0 and ve are the wavelength and the
velocity of the excitation signal in the medium, e.g.,
sound velocity in liquid medium. The single unit
device has the volume of hT×(Wg+2 dAD+2RA)×
Lg assuming that Wg > 2RD. Then, the total
number of the unit devices is found approximately
by
(
WT / (Wg +2 dAD +2RA)
)
× (LT / Lg) where
RA > RD is assumed due to the utilized set of
CdSe/ZnS QDs in this article. Next, the frequency
multiplier effect is theoretically modeled.
5
C. Frequency Multiplication Modeling
Assuming that the current position of the donors
on the lth layer is given by yl(t) = l dD +
A sin(?0 t + 2 ? l dD / ?e) in a single unit device,
the emitted light intensity by the acceptors on the
jth layer at the time interval between i?t and
(i + 1)?t is trivially calculated as approximately
equal to the following:
Il,j(i?t) = ID DB ?D ?A ?tND
×
kA R
6
0
(d2
AD
+|yl,j(i?t)|2)4
4 d2
AD
+|yl,j(i?t)|2
+ kAR60
(3)
where yl,j(i?t) = j dA ? yl(i?t). ND is given by
two single chains of QDs placed on the two sidelines
of the graphene layer which are not clamped as
shown in Fig. 2(b) as follows:
ND = 2×
Lg
?QD DQD
(4)
where the QDs are placed on a short line compared
with Lg, i.e., Lg / ?QD with ?QD ? 1, such that the
donors on the same layers experience approximately
the same displacement as the resonator vibrates.
It is assumed that dD, dA > R0 such that at a
single time interval ?t, each acceptor is excited by
only a single donor with the closest distance at the
z-axis. Then, the total number of emitted photons
in the time interval i?t is given as follows:
np,A(i?t) =
Nl,A?
j=?Nl,A
max
l?[?Nl,D,Nl,D]
{
Il,j(i?t)
hp faD
}
×
WT
Wg + dAD + 2RA
LT
Lg
(5)
The acousto-optic frequency multiplication occurs
with the multiple periodic emissions in each ac-
ceptor layer due to the large vibration amplitude
of A ? dA such that the donor in a single layer
visits multiple acceptor layers in a single acoustic
vibration period Tp. As a result, low frequency
acoustic signals are converted to high frequency
optical signals with a multiplication factor lim-
ited by the total photon emission time ?t, the
resonance amplitude and the distance between the
layers. Assume that the position of the membrane
on the l = 0 layer for a sinusoidal excitation is
approximately given by A?0 sin(?0 t) where the
membrane is at the same level with the acceptor
layer on the j = 0 layer at t = 0. Then, the period
of the emitted photon intensity between the first
two acceptor layers as the donor membrane passes
is approximately given by Tmin ? tmin,1 ? tmin,0
where tmin,1 = (1 / ?0) sin
?1((dA + R0) /A) and
tmin,0 = (1 / ?0) sin
?1(?R0 /A) resulting in the
maximum frequency emission of fmax = f0×Mmax
where the multiplication factor is given as follows:
Mmax ?
2 ?
sin?1(dA+R0
A
) + sin?1(R0
A
)
(6)
Similarly, the minimum frequency photon emis-
sion period occurring at the peak amplitude of
the resonating membrane where the velocity drops
to zero is approximated by Tmax ? tmax,1 ?
tmax,0 where tmax,1 = (1 / ?0)? / 2 and tmax,0 =
(1 / ?0) sin
?1(1 ? (dA + R0) /A). Then, the mini-
mum multiplication factor drops to the following:
Mmin ?
2 ?
? /2? sin?1(1? (dA +R0) /A)
(7)
A CSS sequence with a nonlinear FM modulation
between fmin = Mmin×f0 and fmax = Mmax×f0 is
generated compared with hyperbolic and sinusoidal
CSS sequences in literature [20]. Next, the fabrica-
tion of the proposed device is discussed.
D. Device Fabrication
The proposed architecture should be experimen-
tally verified based on the presented unique me-
chanical design. The recent works on graphene are
promising to manufacture complex designs with
nanometer accuracy. The construction of multiple
arrays of resonating graphene membranes is experi-
mentally feasible based on the studies in [21], drop-
casting of QDs on graphene membrane is achieved
in [22], [23] and the frame structure where the
acceptors reside and the graphene membranes are
clamped can be chosen as carbon membranes with
nanoscale thicknesses allowing complex layered de-
signs [24]. Besides that, the attachment on cells or
biological units is feasible based on the experimen-
tal studies showing the cells adhering to graphene
oxide (GO) membrane steadily without harmful tox-
icity [6], [25], [26]. Next, CSS modulator structure
to generate different sequences and the utilization
for particle tracking tasks are discussed.
IV. CHIRP SPREAD SPECTRUM MODULATOR AND
NANOSCALE PARTICLE TRACKING
Orthogonal CSS sequences are generated for mul-
tiple particle tracking networks with unique de-
6
Fig. 3. A sample acceptor emission photon count waveform with chirped
signal structure and TF spreading based division of the waveform into distinct
CSS sequences S1 and S2 which can be realized with a special geometrical
design of donor and acceptor placements.
modulation capability at the optical receiver. As-
sume that, a set of chip sequences is generated
by uniquely positioning the acceptor layers with
a number of layers M and sequence index k ?
[1, K] denoted by Cpk = {jk,1, jk,2, . . . , jk,M ; jk,n ?
[?Nl,A, Nl,A], n ? [1,M ]} resulting in the follow-
ing emission chirp sequence:
Sk(i?t) =
?
j?Cpk
max
l?[?Nl,D,Nl,D]
{
Il,j(i?t)
hp faD
}
×
WT
Wg + dAD + 2RA
×
LT
Lg
(8)
Two example sets of CSS sequences having both
time and frequency spread are shown in Fig. 3 where
two sequences are orthogonal in both time and
frequency domain providing a significantly powerful
chip generation mechanism. It is observed that the
duration and the frequency of chip sequences de-
noted with Tck for kth time interval are different due
to the different velocity of the donor while passing
through equivalently separated acceptor layers. The
frequency of the chips follows the instantaneous
frequency of the resonating donor membrane. Next,
the generated CSS sequences are utilized firstly for
SPT and then for MPT purposes.
A. Single Particle Tracking
The conventional methods utilized for target
tracking, e.g., in a transparent microfluidic cell
tracking platform, are applied for the proposed
nanoscale system such as hybrid acousto-optical
TDOA with acoustic and optical excitations to find
the positions of the nano-biological objects that
the modulator is attached as shown in Fig. 1. The
position is found by checking the TDOA with a
reference object as follows:
Dk,z = (?k,z ? ?0,z) / ve (9)
where z-axis coordinate of the kth cell or the
biological particle is determined, ?k,z and ?0,z are
the delays of the detected CSS sequences and the
reference modulator at a fixed position, respectively,
and ve is the sound velocity in liquid which can be
measured with sensors. The accuracy is determined
by the estimation of the velocity of sound in the
medium, detection of the first period of the optical
CSS sequence and pilot training with a large set of
reference modulators positioned in the microfluidic
environment. Therefore, the proposed system pro-
vides a simple and accurate SPT borrowing from
classical target tracking approaches. The extension
to MPT scenario is achieved by generating CSS
sequences with different TF supports.
B. Multiple Particle Tracking
The tagging denoted by CSSTag is achieved by
demodulating the sequences of different modulators
in a MPT scenario. In MPT, either the particles are
attached with the resonators having different ultra-
sound resonance frequencies or the same frequency
f0. In the former case, multiple cells are tracked by
exciting them with different frequencies at a single
instant and checking the TDOA in the demodulator.
However, in the latter case an interfering set of CSS
sequences should be demodulated. Then, with the
similar approach in the x and y axes, a scanning
low-cost system is realized to quickly track low
velocity targets. It is assumed that that the cells do
not experience high mobility due to the resonating
effect of the sound waves, e.g., ?e = 2.2 cm for
f0 ? 71 KHz. On the other hand, f0 can be
increased with lower Lg to obtain wavelengths com-
parable with cellular sizes. The proposed system
does not utilize sound modulation or ultrasound
receiver, therefore, it is a low-cost system design
with high accuracy target detection capability for
nanoscale communication networks.
The auto-correlation and cross-correlation of chirp
sequences are analyzed to define their robustness
with respect to inter-symbol interference (ISI) and
narrow band noise. The correlation is defined for
7
Fig. 4. Time-frequency filtering based optimum multiple particle CSS receiver.
two CSS tags with indices i and j having the photon
count periodic vectors Si and Sj as follows:
rc(Si,Sj, ?) =
1
NI
NI?1?
m=0
Np?1?
n=0
Si
(
?(m,n)
)
Ei
×
Sj
(
?(m,n) + ?
)
Ej
(10)
where ?(m,n) = mTp + n?t, NI different periods
are utilized with an equal gain combining (EGC)
diversity approach and an estimation method similar
to classical periodogram [27] to find the average
correlation, Ek is the average photon count energy
defined as Ek ?
?Np?1
n=0 S
2
k(n?t) for k ? [1, K],
Np ? Tp/?t and cyclic shift is utilized due
to periodically oscillating CSS sequences. In the
following, the received signal is firstly diversity
combined with EGC by utilizing the samples in
multiple periods and, then the waveform denoted
by rT (t) is passed through the correlator or matched
filter to estimate the delays.
Assuming that the channel is not frequency selec-
tive for the low bandwidth of the CSS signal and
the velocities of the cells are small compared with
the speed of sound, a TF receiver architecture is
utilized to track the positions of multiple cells as
shown in Fig. 4 including a delay estimation block
similar to a RAKE receiver for multi-path multi-user
receivers [28]. The received optical emission signals
Sk for k ? [1, K] pass through the microfluidic
optical channel including the effects of scattering,
attenuation and optical absorption [29]. However,
it is assumed that the channel is not frequency
selective, the CSS sequence has a low bandwidth
and a large number of NI periods are utilized to
estimate the total emission in a single period of Tp
to simply define SNR performance metrics based
on the summation of individual photon counts in
the simulation studies. The proposed framework can
be easily extended to time-varying and frequency
selective optical channels. The received signals are
passed through EQC to obtain rT (t) denoting the
received signal waveform in a single period. Then,
the corresponding TF CSS filter is applied on the
received signal for each discrete time delay in
[0, d× ? ] and for each CSS sequence where ? and
d are determined with respect to the desired reso-
lution and the maximum distance to the reference
modulator in the microfluidic chip. The results are
correlated with TF filtered and delayed sequences
denoted by SFk (t?j ?) for j ? [1, d] and k ? [1, K].
Then, the estimate ??k is obtained for each index k.
The computational complexity is discussed next.
C. Computational Complexity of MPT
The computational complexity includes K × d ×
Np multiplications in time filtering, K × d ×
Np logNp operations in frequency domain filtering
and, K × d×Np multiplications and K×d additions
for the correlation blocks. It is possible to realize the
set of correlations with complexity on the order of
O(K × Np × logNp) instead of O(K × d × Np)
by utilizing Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) based
approaches where d ? Np. The application of
more complex filtering and detection algorithms
in classical target tracking literature are left as
future works to optimize the performance. Next, the
simplifications in the channel model for simulation
purposes and the definition of SNR are presented.
D. Channel and SNR Modeling
Assuming a frequency flat and non time-varying
optical channel response H(f0, t) for the duration
8
of NI × ?t on the order of several microseconds,
the received signal r(t) is represented as follows:
r(t) =
K?
k=1
Hk(f0, t)Sk(t? ?k) + n(t) (11)
where the channel response of each channel is
denoted by hk(t) with frequency flat response of
Hk(f0, t) under additive white Gaussian noise n(t)
assumption. In Section VI, the performance is sim-
ulated for varying total SNR defined as follows:
SNR ?
1
K2
????
K?
k=1
µk
????
2
|H(f0, t)|
2
?2n
(12)
where a simplification is utilized for equal channel
responses H(f0, t) to provide a measurement metric
for SNR and the mean number of photons for CSS
Tagj is denoted by µk ? (1 /Np)
?Np?1
m=0 Sk(m?t).
The Gaussian noise is assumed to have equal mean
(µ) and variance (?2n) denoted by N(µ, ?
2
n) as dis-
cussed in [30] by approximating the Poisson process
of photon arrivals at each time interval ?t resulting
in a more accurate and worst case SNR definition
compared with E2k / ?
2
n < µ
2
k / ?
2
n. The performance
obtained with a specific level SNR defined with
respect to µ2k / ?
2
n is converted to a lower SNR
defined with respect to E2k / ?
2
n.
It is left as a future work to extend the framework
to include Doppler velocity estimation, to optimize
for more efficient calculations and to combine with
the classical radar and target tracking solutions
utilizing Fractional Fourier Transform based TF
filtering with slicing on TF plane [31]. More com-
plex CSS sequences allow a code division multiple
access (CDMA) architecture for the MPT radar. The
proposed simultaneous TF filtering system is robust
to noise or ISI, and better design of CSS sequences
and the performance studies are open issues.
V. CHALLENGES AND OPEN ISSUES
There are a set of challenges for the realiza-
tion of the proposed particle tracking system and
modulators, and a set of open issues promising to
significantly improve the simulated theoretical per-
formances in this article as follows. The simplicity
of the proposed theoretic model and device, and
the simulation performance support further efforts
to realize CSSTag prototype and perform experi-
ments. Experimenting and verifying both VFRET
phenomenon and CSSTag are left as future works.
A. QD Related Issues
Blinking and flickering problems observed in QDs
as discussed in [25], [32] are averaged due to the
significant number of D-A pairs in a transmitter
utilizing diversity of multiple resonators and layers,
and utilization of high number of repetitive periods
with EGC based estimation. Photo-bleaching is not
a significant concern due to the high durability of
QDs compared with other organic materials and low
photon count for each QD under low level of light
intensity [25]. On the other hand, the exponential
decay profile of acceptor fluorescence emission is
approximated by counting the photons in an interval
of 2 tA. It will be further analyzed as a future work
to find the speed limits of frequency multiplication
for high speed nanoscale optical applications in ad-
dition to the in-body and microfluidic applications,
e.g., LED based CSS high speed modulators for vis-
ible light communications (VLC). The modulation
speed is limited by the fluorescence lifetime which
can be improved with different materials, e.g., fast
radiative lifetimes and FRET of CdSe nanoplatelets
(NPLs) on the orders of tens of picoseconds [33], or
with recent studies showing the decrease in lifetime
for CdSe/ZnS QDs dropcasted on graphene and
MoS2 layers [22], [23].
B. Optical Channel Modelling and Receiver Performance
The efficiency of the photo detection can be im-
proved with PMTs providing 1000× gains to further
improve the sensitivity of the proposed device. On
the other hand, the effects of the channel and the
collection efficiencies of the photodetectors should
be modeled with more accuracy where a frequency
flat model is assumed in this article with a large
number of tag periods NI and small bandwidth
in the CSS sequences. Modeling the attenuation,
absorption and scattering of the microfluidic channel
is necessary to exactly model the SNR performance
at the receiver. In this article, both high and low
SNR regimes are considered to simulate the signif-
icant effects of the channel. If there is frequency-
selective response due to special bio-organic topol-
ogy between the photodetector and the cell, then
the response can be utilized to tailor specific TF
tags with special arrangements of D-A pairs.
9
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
PARAMETER VALUES PARAMETER VALUES
?g 2200 (kg/m
3) FT 1 N/m
K(#Cells) 2 kA 1
mA 3.04 10
?19 (gr) mD 1.46 10
?19 (gr)
?aD 540 (nm) ?
e
A 580 (nm)
Dext 0.02 (M
?1cm?1) ID 100, 1000 (W/m
2/nm)
RD 2.9 (nm) RA 3.7 (nm)
DB 40 (nm) R0 6.63 (nm)
?A 0.6 dAD 2 (nm)
k?A, k?D 4, 88 ?QD 50
Lg 10 µm Wg 20 (nm)
hT 10 µm hg 0.335 (nm)
WT = LT 10 µm Sm(%) 0.005 – 1
SNR ?7 to 10 dB ve 1543 (m/s)
?w 0.74 ?w 1000 (kg/m
3)
C. Toxicity and Biocompatibility
Toxicity of CdSe/ZnS QDs is discussed in [25]. It
is tolerated due to low interaction time of the cells
with the modulators and the potential for special
graphene or carbon membrane enclosure preventing
the QDs to disperse out of the device. Besides that,
graphene is a biocompatible material with signif-
icantly increasing number of experimental studies
creating methods for making it more suitable for
biomedical applications [26].
VI. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS
The performance of the proposed MPT system is
simulated with the parameters given in Table I for
both the frequency multiplier architecture and the
target tracking architecture for K = 2 particles or
the cells with CSS tags denoted by Tag1 and Tag2.
The graphene membrane parameters of ?g and FT
are set to the practical parameters defined in litera-
ture [6]. The donors and the acceptors are chosen as
CdSe/ZnS QDs with diameters of RD = 2.9 nm and
RA = 3.7 nm, respectively, with donor absorption
and acceptor emission wavelengths of ?aD = 540 nm
and ?eA = 580 nm, respectively, and the parameters
of Dext, DB , ?A and R0 are defined in [6]. Their
weights mD and mA are calculated based on the
reference weight of the QD with 2.5 nm diameter
simulated in [6] by assuming QDs as homogeneous
spherical structures. The membrane dimensions are
set to Wg = 20 nm and Lg = 10µm for SLG with
the thickness hg = 0.335 nm. The resonance is in
the ultrasound regime with f0 ? 71 KHz in the
fluid environment assumed as water with ?w ? 0.74
given in [17], the mass density of ?w ? 1000
(kg/m3) and ve ? 1543 m/s. The total device dimen-
sion parameters are set to hT = WT = LT = 10µm
suitable to be utilized in microscale biological units.
?QD = 50 ? 1 results in a resonating cluster of
QDs at the similar vertical heights. k?A and k?D
are set to four in the multiplier device to create
independent D-A pairs while k?D is set to 88 in
the radar tracking system to realize different CSS
optical emission sequences. The excitation light
intensities are set to 100 (W/m2/nm) and 1000
(W/m2/nm) for the multiplier and tracking cases,
respectively, with more powerful light sources for
tracking while 1000 (W/m2/nm) corresponding to
4 (W/cm2) in QD bandwidth of 40 (nm) is much
smaller than the state-of-the-art light intensity of
fluorescence microscopes. Sm is assumed to change
between low and high levels of strain, i.e., from
0.005% to 1%, with higher ultrasound pressures
for cellular tracking. For the MPT simulation in
Section VI-B, SNR is defined with respect to the
average (µ1 + µ2) / 2 and chosen between ?7 to
10 dB. Next, FM modulation with the multiplier is
numerically simulated, and then the radar tracking
system for microfluidic applications is simulated
with Monte-Carlo simulation experiments.
A. Frequency Multiplier and Optical FM Modulation
FM modulation and the frequency multiplication
effect are simulated for periodically placed D-A
layers as shown in Fig. 2 while assuming k?A =
k?D = 4 and ?t = 20 ns as two times of the total
average time for photon emissions in [18] validating
simulations reaching fmax = 50 MHz. This is larger
than the simulated frequencies as shown in Fig.
5(c). The total number of D-A pairs is calculated
as ? 12 × 106 for the device dimensions of 10µm
× 10µm × 10µm and the weight of approximately
23 picograms compared with average weight of
the human cell on the orders of nanograms while
assuming the acceptors reside on carbon membranes
of the thickness of one nanometer, the width of 2RA
and the length of Lg / 50 with the same mass density
of the graphene as shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 5(a),
the acceptor emission photon count np,A per ?t is
shown while the corresponding finst, fmin and fmax
are shown in Fig. 5(b). The frequency multiplication
and FM modulation with instantaneous frequency
changes as described in Fig. 3 are clearly observed
for the device designed with respect to Sm = 1% (to
10
determine Nl,A as discussed in Section III-A) while
operating at Sm = 0.1%. In Fig. 5(c), the increase
in Sm results in faster velocities for the donors
passing through layers and with higher frequency
multiplication effect. Next, the proposed architec-
ture is modified with special layer arrangements to
realize different CSS sequences.
B. Single and Multiple Particle Tracking
The mechanical structure of the specially designed
tags is shown in Figure 6 realizing two different
CSS sequences, i.e., Tag1 and Tag2. The device
is designed with Sm < 0.2% tunable with respect
to the application. The distance between the donor
layers is increased with k?D = 22 k?A while
k?A is kept at four. The same device dimension
described in Table I results in a modulator with the
total number of donor and acceptor molecules of
? 6×105 and ? 6.5×106, respectively, and the total
weight of ? 3 picograms. The groups of acceptor
layers are formed by shifting their relative positions
with respect to the donor layers to form different
time and frequency bands in the CSS sequences
Tag1 and Tag2 as shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b). The
rectangular boxes in Fig. 7(b) show the TF support
of the two tags where TF filtering synchronized with
the carrier period separates two tags in the receiver.
In Fig. 8(a), the auto and cross correlations
between the tags are shown where the auto-
correlations show oscillating and decaying correla-
tions while cross-correlations are smaller than the
auto-correlations with oscillating magnitude. The
envelope of Tag1 decays more smoothly with a
lower performance with respect to Tag2. Since the
effect of Doppler velocity is not taken into account,
the optimum receiver performance defined in Fig. 9
is experimented by excluding the filtering steps in
the remaining simulations. In Fig. 8(c), the effect
of the interference of Tag2 on Tag1 is simulated
showing the peak point ?1,max of rc(S1(t)+S2(t?
?2),S1(t), ?1) with respect to ?1 for varying ?2.
It is observed that the peak of Tag1 jumps from
the maximum autocorrelation point to the neighbor
peaks due to interference from Tag2 for a finite
set of ?2 delays. The same performance degradation
occurs for Tag1 in the high noise regime similarly
as shown in the following numerical simulations in
Fig. 9. It is an open issue to design better codes
with orthogonal and fast decaying correlations. In
simulations, it is assumed that the particle distances
are not coinciding with the critical delay points.
The total emission optical power for the proposed
sequences in Fig. 7(a) with the mean photon count
of µav = (µ1 + µ2) / 2 is calculated as approx-
imately Pe = µav hp vf /?t = 2 nW. A basic
photodetector of the responsivity Rp = 1A/W and
the idealistic case with the full photon collection
efficiency result in shot noise power 2 q?f Rp Pe ?
2.5 10?21 (Amp2) for the bandwidth of ?f ? 5
MHz shown in Fig. 7(b) and the thermal noise
power of 4 ?B T ?f /Req ? 8.2 10
?21 (Amp2) with
the assumption Req = 10 M? where ?B = 1.38×
10?23 J/K is the Boltzmann constant and T = 300
K is the room temperature [34]. The signal power is
approximately 4 10?18 (Amp2) which is much larger
than the noise power. The SNR can be increased
with PMTs significantly.
In Fig. 9, the Monte-Carlo simulation results for
varying SNR of rT (t) are shown where ?1 and ?2 are
the delays corresponding to the vertical positions of
Tag1 and Tag2 chosen in the range ±[0, 5, 10] ×
?t corresponding to the vertical distances with
respect to reference modulator approximately in
[?155, 155]µm computed with ve × ? . The number
of simulation experiments is set to 105 while the
average estimation errors denoted by ? err for ?1 and
?2 are shown for SPT cases where only one particle
is present in the channel and MPT case where both
the particles are present. As SNR approaches ? ?4
dB and ? ?1 dB for SPT of Tag1 and Tag2,
respectively, the average estimation errors are shown
to decrease to zero providing a highly error tolerant
SPT mechanism. Besides that, the average error
on the orders of tens of picoseconds (ps) for the
simulated levels of high noise is lower than the
maximum resolution ?t = 20 ns corresponding
to ve × ?t ? 30µm resolution in the z-axis.
Therefore, even low levels of SNR values allow
accurate cell positioning due to the spreading of the
CSS sequences. On the other hand, in MPT case,
the simulations are realized for ?1 = ??2 and the
estimation error decreases as the distance between
the particles increases with lower ISI. The perfor-
mance of Tag1 is worse than Tag2 due to slower
decaying envelope. The estimation errors decrease
to zero for SNR values approximately larger than
7 dB providing an accurate MPT mechanism. The
design of CSS sequences, and the performance with
11
0 5 10 14
0
4
8
12
0 5 10 14
Time (µs)
10 3
10 4
10 5
10 6
10 7
10 8
F
re
q
u
en
cy
(H
z)
finst
f0
fmax
fmin
10 -2 10 -1 10 0
Sm(%)
10 4
10 5
10 6
10 7
F
re
q
u
en
cy
(H
z)
f0
fmin
fmax
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 5. (a) Acceptor emission photon count np,A(i?t) and (b) the instantaneous frequency by Hilbert transform for varying time intervals in a single acoustic
period with f0 ? 71 KHz, ?t = 20 ns, k?A = k?D = 4, Lg = 10µm and Sm = 0.1%, and (c) fmin-fmax of the instantaneous frequency for varying
Sm from 0.005% to 1%.
Fig. 6. Two basic device structures for different CSS tags where Tag1 and
Tag2 result in higher and lower frequency chirps, respectively, designed with
respect to Sm < 0.2%, and with separated groups of acceptor layers having
inter-layer distance parameter k?A = 4 while individual donor layers are
separated by k?D = 22 k?A.
respect to the effects of the channel and Doppler
shift with high velocity particles are open issues.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this article, a novel nanoscale acousto-optic
radar architecture and particle tracking system is
presented which significantly improves the state-
of-the-art fluorescence based imaging systems with
signaling based tracking capability. The system is
based on the nanoscale optical modulator struc-
tures utilizing VFRET and vibrating CdSe/ZnS QDs
on graphene membranes. The proposed modula-
tor achieves acousto-optic frequency multiplication,
generates CSS sequences having different TF sup-
ports and exploits the unique properties of graphene
and QDs. The optical CSS sequence generation
mechanisms are simulated numerically with modu-
lators having micrometer dimensions and weights of
0 5 10 14
0
2
4
6
(a)
0 5 10 14
10 5
10 6
10 7
10 8
(b)
Fig. 7. (a) Time domain waveforms and (b) the instantaneous frequencies of
the Tag1 and Tag2 CSS sequences.
several picograms, and low level of light intensities
compared with classical laser excitations. Monte-
Carlo simulations are realized for two particle track-
ing experiment showing significant performance for
MPT tasks with SNRs in the range ?7 dB to 10 dB
and high speed tracking capability. CSSTag system
can be utilized in all the fluorescence based imaging
applications enhancing their capabilities such as
12
-4 -2 0 2 4
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-4 -2 0 2 4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
-7 -5 -3 -1 1 3 5 7
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 8. The correlations for Tag1 and Tag2 CSS sequences (a) with and (b) without TF filtering, and (c) the effect of Tag2 interference on Tag1 shifting
the maximum autocorrelation point of Tag1 by ?1,max for varying ?2 in rc(S1(t) + S2(t ? ?2),S1(t), ?1).
Fig. 9. Average estimation errors for the delays of Tag1 and Tag2, i.e., ?1
and ?2, for varying SNR for SPT and MPT where ?2 = ??1 for MPT.
diagnostic microfluidic and in-body applications of
cell identification, cytometry and cellular imaging.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by Vestel Electronics Inc.,
Manisa, 45030, Turkey.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Shen et al., “Single particle tracking: from theory to biophysical
applications,” Chemical Reviews, DOI: 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00815,
2017.
[2] I. Smal, M. Loog, W. Niessen and E. Meijering, “Quantitative comparison
of spot detection methods in fluorescence microscopy”, IEEE Transac-
tions on Medical Imaging, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 282–301, 2010.
[3] S. H. Rezatofighi, S. Gould, B. T. Vo, B. N. Vo, K. Mele and R. Hartley,
“Multi-target tracking with time-varying clutter rate and detection profile:
application to time-lapse cell microscopy sequences”, IEEE Transactions
on Medical Imaging, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1336–1348, 2015.
[4] I. Smal, K. Draegestein, N. Galjart, W. Niessen and E. Meijering,
“Particle filtering for multiple object tracking in dynamic fluorescence
microscopy images: Application to microtubule growth analysis”, ”, IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 789–804, 2008.
[5] M. Y. Berezin and S. Achilefu, “ Fluorescence lifetime measurements and
biological imaging,” Chemical Reviews, vol. 110, no. 5, pp. 2641–2684,
2010.
[6] B. Gulbahar and G. Memisoglu, “Nanoscale Optical Communications
Modulator and Acousto-Optic Transduction with Vibrating Graphene and
Resonance Energy Transfer,” Proc. of The IEEE ICC 2017 Selected Areas
in Communications Symposium Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale
Communications Track, 21-25 May, Paris, France, 2017.
[7] B. Gulbahar and G. Memisoglu, “Acousto-optic tagging and identifica-
tion,” EP409508, EPO Patent Application, May 2017.
[8] B. Gulbahar and G. Memisoglu, “Acousto-optic nanoscale frequency
multiplier,” EP407711, EPO Patent Application, May 2017.
[9] B. Gulbahar and G. Memisoglu, “Acousto-optic transducer, array and
method,” PCT/EP2017/054408, EPO Patent Application, February 2017.
[10] X. Michalet et al., “Development of new photon-counting detectors for
single-molecule fluorescence microscopy,” Philosophical Transactions of
the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, vol. 368, no. 1611,
p. 20120035, 2013.
[11] A. P. Reddington et al., “An interferometric reflectance imaging sensor
for point of care viral diagnostics”, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 3276–3283, 2013.
[12] W. Wang et al., “Optofluidic intracavity spectroscopy of canine heman-
giosarcoma”, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 58, no.
4, pp. 853–860, 2011.
[13] J. J. Li et al., “Optical scanner for immunoassays with up-converting
phosphorescent labels”, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1560–1571, 2008.
[14] C. Lei et al., “Optical time-stretch imaging: Principles and applications,”
Applied Physics Reviews, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 011102, 2016.
[15] A. Augustin, “A study of LoRa: Long range and low power networks
for the Internet of Things”, Sensors, vol. 16, no. 9, p. 1466, 2016.
[16] S. Jiang, S. Shi and X. Wang, “Nanomechanics and vibration analysis
of graphene sheets via a 2D plate model”, Journal of Physics D: Applied
Physics, vol. 47, no. 4, p. 045104, 2013.
[17] M. K. Kwak, “Vibration of circular membranes in contact with water”,
Journal of Sound and Vibration, vol. 178, no. 5, pp. 688–690, 1994.
[18] M. A. Shivkumar et al., “FRET from CdSe/ZnS Core-Shell Quantum
Dots to Fluorescein 27 Dye,” Open Journal of Physical Chemistry, vol.
3, pp. 40–48, 2013.
[19] L. Loura, “Simple estimation of Fo?rster resonance energy transfer
(FRET) orientation factor distribution in membranes”, International Jour-
nal of Molecular Sciences”, vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 15252–15270, 2012.
[20] M. A. Khan, R. K. Rao and X. Wang, “Performance of quadratic and
exponential multiuser chirp spread spectrum communication systems”,
Int. Symposium on Performance Evaluation of Computer and Telecom-
munication Systems (SPECTS), pp. 58–63, 2013.
[21] A. M. Zande et al., “Large-scale arrays of single-layer graphene res-
onators”, Nano Letters, vol. 10, no. 12, pp. 4869–4873, 2010.
[22] A. Raja et al., “Energy transfer from quantum dots to graphene and
MoS2: The role of absorption and screening in two-dimensional materi-
als”, Nano Letters, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2328–2333, 2016.
[23] Y. T. Kim et al., “Synthesis of a CdSe-graphene hybrid composed
of CdSe quantum dot arrays directly grown on CVD-graphene and its
ultrafast carrier dynamics,” Nanoscale, vol. 5, no 4, pp. 1483–1488, 2013.
[24] A. Turchanin and A. Golzhauser, “Carbon Nanomembranes”, Advanced
Materials, vol. 28, no. 29, pp. 6075–6103, 2016.
13
[25] C. Brauchle, D. C. Lamb and J. Michaelis, “Single particle tracking and
single molecule energy transfer”, John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[26] B. Gulbahar, “Theoretical Analysis of Magneto-Inductive THz Wireless
Communications and Power Transfer with Multi-layer Graphene Nano-
coils,” IEEE Transactions on Molecular, Biological, and Multi-Scale
Communications, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 60–70, 2017.
[27] P. Stoica and R. L. Moses, “Spectral analysis of signals”, Pearson
Prentice Hall, NJ, 2005.
[28] A. Goldsmith, “Wireless Communications,” Cambridge University
Press, 2005.
[29] H. Guo et al., “Intra-body optical channel modeling for in vivo wireless
nanosensor networks”, IEEE Transactions on Nanobioscience, vol. 15,
no. 1, pp.41–52, 2016.
[30] Samuel W. Hasinoff, “Photon, poisson noise”, Computer Vision,
Springer, pp. 608–610, 2014.
[31] A. Kutay et al., “Optimal filtering in fractional Fourier domains,” IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 45, no, 5, pp. 1129–1143, 1997.
[32] N. Hildebrandt et al., “Energy transfer with semiconductor quantum dot
bioconjugates: A versatile platform for biosensing, energy harvesting, and
other developing applications”, Chemical Reviews, vol. 117, no. 2, pp 53–
711, 2017.
[33] C. E. Rowland et al., “Picosecond energy transfer and multiexciton trans-
fer outpaces Auger recombination in binary CdSe nanoplatelet solids”,
Nature Materials, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 484–489, 2015.
[34] B. Gulbahar and O. B. Akan, “A Communication Theoretical Modeling
of Single-layer Graphene Photodetectors and Efficient Multireceiver Di-
versity Combining,” IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology, vol. 11, no.
3, pp. 601–610, 2012.
