ar
X
iv
:1
70
9.
01
89
9v
1 
 [
cs
.I
T
] 
 6
 S
ep
 2
01
7
1
Localisation, Communication and Networking with
VLC: Challenges and Opportunities
Rong Zhang1
1School of Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, UK
Abstract—The forthcoming Fifth Generation (5G) era raises
the expectation for ubiquitous wireless connectivity to enhance
human experiences in information and knowledge sharing as well
as in entertainment and social interactions. The promising Visible
Light Communications (VLC) lies in the intersection field of
optical and wireless communications, where substantial amount
of new knowledge has been generated by multi-faceted investiga-
tions ranging from the understanding of optical communications
and signal processing techniques to the development of disruptive
networking solutions and to the exploitation of joint localisation
and communications. Building on these new understandings
and exciting developments, this paper provides an overview
on the three inter-linked research strands of VLC, namely
localisation, communications and networking. Advanced recent
research activities are comprehensively reviewed and intriguing
future research directions are actively discussed, along with
the identifications of a range of challenges, both for enhancing
the established applications and for stimulating the emerging
applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
We are at the dawn of an era in information and communi-
cations technology with unprecedented demand for digitalised
everything, for connected everything and for automated ev-
erything [1]. The next decade will witness a range of disrup-
tive changes in wireless technologies, embracing all aspects
of cross-disciplinary innovations [2]. Fundamental challenges
arise when we have reached the limit of the conventional
Radio Frequency (RF) based wireless technologies, which are
increasingly less capable of meeting the escalating traffic-
demands and of satisfying the emerging use-cases. Especially,
there have been substantial research efforts dedicated to the
high carrier frequencies, including the millimetre wave [3]
and the visible light spectrum [4] in the forthcoming Fifth
Generation (5G) wireless networks landscape. In this paper,
we provide an overview on the fast growing technology of
Visible Light Communications (VLC), which lies at the cross-
section of optical and wireless communications, and focuses
on the human perceivable part of the electromagnetic spec-
trum, corresponding to wavelengths from 380nm to 780nm.
The use of the visible light spectrum for wireless com-
munications has gained great interests. This is because the
visible light spectrum is licence-free, has a vast bandwidth
and does not interfere with the RF band. Historically, in
the late 19th-century, Alexander Graham Bell invented the
photo-phone by transmitting voice signals over modulated
sunlight [5]. Almost a century later, artificial light generated
by fluorescent lamps was also successfully demonstrated for
supporting low data-rate communications [6]. It is these ex-
citing experiments that inspired the modern VLC using Light
Emitting Diodes (LEDs). In addition to facilitating communi-
cations, being a modern illumination technology as their main
function, LEDs have been increasingly dominating over the
traditional incandescent lamps and fluorescent lamps, owing
to their higher energy-efficiency, colour-rendering capability
and longevity [7]. Hence, the potential for VLC is further
supported by the anticipated presence of a ubiquitous and
efficient LED lighting infrastructure.
The pioneering implementation of VLC using LEDs for
the dual purpose of indoor illumination and communications
was carried out by the Nakagawa laboratory in the early
2000s [8]. Subsequently, tremendous research efforts have
been invested in improving the link-level performance between
a single LEDs array and a single receiver, focusing on both
the LED components and on the VLC transceivers, where
ambitious multi Gbps targets have been achieved. These ex-
citing link-level achievements set the basis for broadening the
scope of VLC research beyond point-to-point applications [9],
with the focus on VLC aided networking, where various
promising protocols, architectures and cross-layer solutions
have been proposed. Furthermore, LEDs based localisation
has also attracted dedicated research interests, where recent
advances have demonstrated sub-centimetre accuracy and 3D
positioning capability [10]. In addition to the main thrust
research in localisation, communications and networking, VLC
can also provide innovative solutions for a number of use-
cases [11], including vehicular, Device-to-Device (D2D) and
underwater applications, just to name a few.
Along with the above technical advances, there have been
significantly increased activities in the VLC domain. Large
scale research programmes were launched, bringing together
research-led universities and industries, as exemplified by
the Visible Light Communications Consortium (VLCC), the
EU-FP7 project OMEGA, the consortium on ultra parallel
VLC. Most recently, VLC was also included in the scope
for networking research beyond 5G under the framework
of EU H2020. Dedicated research centres have been also
established, such as the Smart Lighting Engineering Research
Center in US, the Li-Fi Research and Development Centre
in UK and the Optical Wireless Communication and Net-
work Centre in China, etc. Furthermore, in recent years,
ComSoc has published three special issues on VLC in the
Communications Magazine [12], [13] and in the Wireless
Communications Magazine [14]. Moreover, three consecutive
07~08 09~10 11~12 13~14 15~16
0
500
1000
1500
2000
nu
m
be
r 
of
 p
ap
er
s
conference
journal
total
Fig. 1. Biannual statistics on the number of papers published in IEEE and
OSA in the topic of visible light communications and positioning. These data
are gathered by searching for the keywords (Visible Light Communications,
VLC, Visible light Positioning, VLP).
international workshops on VLC have also been sponsored by
ComSoc along with ICC’15, ICC’16 and ICC’17. Meanwhile,
GlobeCom has continuously offered annual workshops on
optical wireless since 2010. These investments and efforts have
all contributed to the growing success of the subject.
Hence, we see a strong momentum on the research of VLC,
as evidenced by the publication statistics in Fig 1, that moti-
vates this special issue and our paper is organised as follows.
We will first introduce some basics in Section II-A. We will
then review the achievements of three main research strands
of VLC, namely localisation in Section II-B, communications
in Section II-C and networking in Section II-D. After that, we
will discuss about the challenges of VLC in Section III-A and
paint our vision on the future of VLC in Section III-B. Finally,
we will conclude our discourse in Section IV.
II. MAIN RESEARCH STRANDS
A. Basics
The modern VLC relies on LEDs for the dual purpose of
illumination and communications. LEDs are solid-state semi-
conductor devices [7], [15], which are capable of converting
electrical energy to incoherent light through the process of
electro-luminescence. When using LEDs for VLC, data can
be readily modulated by electronically flickering the intensity
of light at a rate fast enough to be imperceivable by human
eyes. At the receiver, data can be directly detected using inex-
pensive photo-detectors or imaging sensors. This transceiver
structure may be referred to as the Intensity Modulation (IM)
and Direct Detection (DD), which is much simpler than the
conventional coherent RF receivers relying on complicated
and energy-consuming heterodyne structure. Although there
exist implementations of Laser Diodes (LDs) for VLC [16],
[17] that can provide an even higher data-rate, our following
discussions will be based on the more popular LEDs.
The primary function of LEDs is for illumination, hence
the performance of VLC is naturally dependent on the spe-
cific characteristics of LEDs [18]. White light is the most
widely used color for many applications, where there are three
different methods to produce while light LEDs. The most
common method is the use of blue light LEDs with yellow
phosphor coating layer [19]. This is a low-cost method, but
the coating layer limits the modulation bandwidth to only
tens of MHz. Early experiments have demonstrated tens of
Mbps data-rate [20], while hundreds of Mbps data-rate may
also be achieved with advanced processing [21] and adaptive
receiver [22]. The second method to generate white light is to
carefully mix the color of Red, Green and Blue (RGB) emitted
from the RGB LEDs [23]. This method is more expensive, but
it offers much wider modulation bandwidth upto hundreds of
MHz, supporting multi Gbps data-rate [24]. The third method
is resulted from the recent advances on micro-LED array [25],
which produces white light through wavelength conversion.
This method is capable of facilitating parallel communications
with even higher data-rate [26].
When the receiving side is considered, there are generally
two types of detectors that are often employed, namely the
photo-detectors and the imaging sensors [27]. In particular,
the Positive-Intrinsic-Negative (PIN) photo-detectors are most
widely considered in current studies, owing to its low cost
to implement and high sensitivity to strong incident light.
By contrast, in the scenario of weak incident light, avalanche
photo-detectors are often more preferred. On the other hand,
imaging sensors are constituted by an array of photo-detectors,
which inherently support the use of pixelated reception owing
to its desirable capability in better separating the optical
channels [28]. Another advantage of imaging sensors is that
they can be readily integrated with camera lens in smart hand-
held devices [29]. Since the frame-rate of the commonly used
camera lens is low, this type of receiver is particularly suitable
for applications requiring low date-rate [30], such as the
project of CeilingCast [31]. Sometimes, focusing lens may also
be used on top of photo-detectors [32] or imaging sensors [33]
to enhance the reception by collecting more light energy from
diffuse links with increased Field of View (FoV). In addition
to the above receivers, other interesting developments include
prism-array receiver [34], solar-cell receiver [35], rotational
receiver [36] and aperture-based receiver [37], etc.
Since the surface diameter of typical photo-detectors is
several thousand times of the light wavelength, the fast fading
effects are averaged out at the receiver. Hence, when the
indoor propagation is considered, the Line of Sight (LoS)
path-loss effect is typically observed, plus the reflections from
diffuse links [38]. In most of the studies, (dispersive) channel
modelling is carried out by assuming Lambertian type emitters
and for simplicity, we adopt the well-established Infra-Red
(IR) channel modelling [39], with the aid of the convolution-
based simulation method to properly characterize the Power
Delay Profile (PDP) of the propagation channels [40]. This
method comes at the expense of complexity, hence more
efficient computational methods were proposed [41]. Further-
more, there are three typical sources of noise, namely the
ambient noise, short noise and thermal noise. In fact, they are
mutually dependent, hence it is important to carry out system
design by taking into account this property [42].
B. Localisation
The widely used Global Navigation Satellite System
(GNSS) technology provides a coarse localisation capability
that works just fine for the majority of outdoor applica-
tions [43]. However, its use for indoor localisation fails, since
the satellite signal has a poor indoor penetration and the multi-
path reflections are highly complex in indoor environment.
Various alternatives were proposed for indoor localisation
services [44], mainly based on RF techniques such as Wireless
Fidelity (Wi-Fi) or Ultra-Wide Band (UWB). However, the
associated cost is often too high to reach the desired accuracy.
Hence, LEDs based localisation becomes an interesting option
to meet the above demand [45]. This is because the LEDs can
be readily integrated in the existed lightening infrastructure
and several nearby LEDs may provide joint localisation to
achieve a very high level of accuracy. Furthermore, the visible
light spectrum can be used in RF sensitive environment and
the imaging sensors built-in the smart hand-held devices
constitute a convenient receiver for LEDs based localisation, or
inexpensive PDs may be purposely installed. In the future 5G
systems, both manufacturing and service robots will become
dominant Machine Type Communication (MTC) devices. In
homes, factories and warehouses, light is useful for accurate
position control of robots [46], again thanks to its linear prop-
agation property and short wavelength. Explicitly, there exist
several approaches for LEDs based localisation, including the
proximity based approach, the triangulation based approach
and the fingerprinting based approach, where each of them
will be elaborated in detail as follows.
The simplest way to realise LEDs based localisation is the
proximity based approach, where the position of the object is
roughly classified to its nearest LED transmitter. This proce-
dure can be conveniently integrated in the cell search stage,
where no complicated algorithms are imposed [47]. Hence,
the achievable localisation accuracy is very coarse, in terms of
decimetres. When further exploiting the geometric properties
of multiple LEDs, the triangulation based approach is capable
of determining the absolute position of the object and reaching
a localisation accuracy in terms of centimetres. This approach
exploits the measured distance (angles) between the multiple
LEDs and the localisation object, where the measurement
could be Time of Arrival (ToA) [48], Time Difference of
Arrival (TDoA) [49], Received Signal Strength (RSS) [50]
and Angle of Arrival (AoA) [51]. There are several challenges
associated with these measurements that may deteriorate the
localisation accuracy. For example, both ToA and TDoA
require strict timing synchronisation, RSS requires detailed
knowledge of radiation pattern and AoA requires careful
calibration of light directionality. Hence, localisation based
on a combination of different measurements is a good prac-
tice [52], [53], particularly for 3D localisation [54]. Finally, the
fingerprinting based approach determines the position of the
object by comparing on-line measured data with pre-stored
off-line measured data [55]. Depending on the richness of
the pre-stored data set, this approach may provide a higher
level of localisation accuracy, but at the cost of an increased
complexity. Nevertheless, this approach has a poor scalability
to use owing to its scene-dependence.
Unique approach exists for LEDs based localisation using
camera sensors available in smart hand-held devices [56].
Thanks to the high density of pixels, camera sensors can
extract detailed spatial information in order to determine the
position of the object with high localisation accuracy by using
vision analysis and image processing. In addition to only
use camera sensors, accelerometer build-in the smart hand-
held devices can also be exploited together to achieve 3D
localisation [57], [58]. To conclude, despite the existence of
various LEDs based localisation approaches and their achieve-
ments, LoS blockage constitutes the single dominant problem,
which is lacking of considerations in the current research.
Hence, the recent study on the effect of multi-path reflections
on positioning accuracy becomes highly practical [59]. More
importantly, when localisation is considered, it should be
included in the entire design chain for achieving a better
integrity [60]. We believe that with further scientific advances,
powerful and robust solutions for LEDs based localisation will
be developed to meet diverse requirements.
C. Communications
As discussed above, VLC is capable of realising the dual
purpose of illumination and communications. Amongst the
cascaded physical layer components of VLC, we elaborate
on those that require contrived design and dedicated dis-
cussions, namely optical domain modulation and Multiple
Input Multiple Output (MIMO). Generally, there are two types
of modulation techniques that are commonly employed for
VLC, namely the single-carrier modulation and multi-carrier
modulation. To elaborate on the former, On-Off Keying (OOK)
constitutes the simplest technique for VLC modulation. Hence,
it is the most commonly studied and experimented technique
together with various different types of LEDs. Despite its sim-
plicity, multi Gbps data-rate has been reported in recent exper-
iment [61]. Developed from the plain OOK, there is a family
of pulse-based modulations, such as Pulse Width Modulation
(PWM) [62] and Pulse Position Modulation (PPM) [63]. These
modulations belong to the M-ary orthogonal signalling, which
is particularly suitable for IM. Unique to VLC, Color Shift
Keying (CSK) has been introduced in the VLC standardisa-
tion 802.15.7 for simultaneously achieving a higher data-rate
and a better dimming support [64], [65]. Specifically, CSK
modulates the signal based on the intensity of the RGB color,
relying on the employment of RGB LEDs. Other interesting
schemes exploiting the color property of VLC may be found
in [66], [67]. It is worth noting that as a modulation technique,
CSK is different from the concept of Wavelength Division
Multiplexing (WDM) [68]. This is because in WDM system,
additional modulation may be designed together with each of
the multiplexing layers.
When considering the multi-carrier modulation family, the
celebrated Optical Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplex-
ing (OOFDM) schemes are often employed. This is because
OOFDM scheme allows parallel data transmissions, and it is
also capable of combating the detrimental channel dispersion
without complex time domain equalisations. Different from the
conventional RF based OFDM schemes, transmitted signals
of OOFDM need to be real-valued and positive in order to
facilitate IM. There are a family of OOFDM schemes, typi-
cally including the Asymmetrically Clipped OOFDM (ACO-
OFDM) scheme and the DC-biased OOFDM (DCO-OFDM)
scheme [69]. In both schemes, the property of Hermitian
symmetry is exploited for rendering the complex-valued signal
to be real-valued, at the cost of halving the bandwidth effi-
ciency. In order to maintain positivity of the transmitted signal,
ACO-OFDM scheme resorts to use only the odd sub-carriers,
while DCO-OFDM scheme resorts to apply sufficient DC bias.
Hence, the former approach is more power efficient, while the
latter approach is more bandwidth efficient [70]. Moreover,
there exist many other interesting realisations of OOFDM,
such as the flip OOFDM [71], unipolar OOFDM [72], multi-
layer OOFDM [73], hybrid OOFDM [74], and DC-informative
OOFDM [75]. In general, OOFDM schemes suffer from
the classic problem of high Peak to Average Power Ratio
(PAPR) [76] and their performance is also limited by the
clipping distortion [77] and the LEDs’ non-linearity [78],
where many countermeasures have thus been proposed [79],
[80], [81]. Despite all these challenges, OOFDM schemes
have attracted great attentions owing to their high data-rate
potential, robustness to channel dispersion and flexibility in
resource allocation [82].
It is important that the above modulation techniques should
be co-designed with LEDs’ illumination requirements to avoid
flickering and support dimming [83]. Flickering refers to the
undesirable effect of human perceivable brightness fluctuation,
or in other words light intensity changes. This is relatively
easy to cope with by using Run Length Limited (RLL) coding
in order to balance the resultant zeros and ones [84], [85].
On the other hand, modern LEDs have now been capable of
supporting arbitrary levels of dimming for energy saving and
environmental-friendly illumination. Hence, a more intriguing
aspect is to jointly design modulation and dimming [86]. In
general, there are two approaches to support dimming with
modulation, namely to control either the light intensity or the
signal duty cycle, where the former is easier to implement
and the latter achieves higher precision [87]. As an example,
in OOK, its on or off levels can be defined to support dimming
or one may introduce compensation period along with the
signalling period without resorting to intensity modification.
Amongst others, pulse-based modulations show great flexibil-
ity in support dimming, such as the variable PPM scheme
proposed in the 802.15.7 standard [88]. On the other hand,
dimming support in multi-carrier modulation requires further
investigations, where recent research has been dedicated to
this direction [89], [90]. In addition to modulation, channel
coding schemes can also be co-designed with dimming support
in mind, as demonstrated in various research efforts, including
turbo codes [91], Reed-Muller codes [92], adaptive codes [93]
and concatenated codes [94].
Similar to the conventional RF based wireless communi-
cations systems, MIMO in VLC is also capable of providing
promising throughput enhancements [95]. It is known that the
full potential of MIMO can only be achieved in a fully scat-
tered environment. However, in VLC, the particular challenge
is that the optical MIMO channels are often highly correlated
and the resultant MIMO channel matrix appears to be rank
deficient [96]. To create full rank MIMO channel matrix, it is
crucial to maintain clear separation of the transmitters at the
(non)-imaging receiver by careful calibration. In addition to
support full rank MIMO channel matrix, robustness to receiver
tilts and blockage is also desirable, where it has been shown
that specifically designed receivers to harness angle diversity
constitutes a good design practice [97], [98]. Most recently,
the research on MIMO in VLC under diffuse channel is also
emerging, leading to substantial practical insights [99]. As
far as the MIMO functions are considered, MIMO in VLC
can achieve diversity gain by using space time coding [100],
multiplexing gain by using parallel transmission [101] and
beamforming gain by using electronic beam steering [102].
Multiple transmit luminaries can also be used to improve
the security of VLC transmission by making the VLC signal
difficult to intercept by an eavesdropper. Several linear beam-
forming schemes for active and passive eavesdroppers have
recently been presented in [103], [104], [105]. Being an
important generalisation, Multiple Input Single Output (MISO)
transmission and in particular, Multi-User MISO (MU-MISO)
transmission have attracted substantial research interests [106].
This is because the MU-MISO scheme provides beneficial
multi-user diversity gain without incurring rank deficient
MIMO channel matrix. However, in this multi-user scenario,
challenges arise when performing inter-user interference can-
cellation, where (non)-linear transmit pre-coding scheme is
required.
D. Networking
The above mentioned advances in physical layer research
of VLC have lead to the development of VLC aided net-
working [107]. Being next to the physical layer, there are
several different candidates for the Medium Access Control
(MAC) layer, including both the multiple access and random
access schemes. Let us now elaborate on the multiple access
scheme first, the most straightforward arrangement is the
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) scheme [108], [109],
where users simply access the network in different time slots.
When multi-carrier modulation is employed, the Orthogonal
Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) scheme allows
users to be allocated different Time and Frequency (TF)
resource blocks [110]. When compared to TDMA scheme,
OFDMA scheme provides a higher flexibility in terms of re-
source allocation and user scheduling, at a modestly increased
complexity. In addition to the above orthogonal multiple
access schemes, in Non-orthogonal Multiple Access (NOMA)
scheme [111], [112], two or more users may be multiplexed in
power domain in addition to the conventional orthogonal TF
domain. At the receiver side, onion-stripping type interference
cancellation is required to separate the users from power-
domain non-orthogonal multiplexing [113]. Other than relying
on the power-domain, spatial domain could also be exploited
at the transmitter to realise NOMA [114]. Differently, (multi-
carrier) Optical Code Division Multiple Access (OCDMA)
scheme relies on assigning each user a unique and specific
optical code [115], [116]. Finally, when random access is
considered, the classic Carrier Sense Multiple Access (CSMA)
scheme remains highly attractive. Importantly, early imple-
mentations have already shown its successful usage [117] and
in slotted random access, both contention access periods and
free periods are included, where the latter ensures guaranteed
time slots for resource limited applications.
The most straightforward way of constructing an indoor
VLC cell is to simply consider each Access Point (AP)
function as an individual cell and to adopt the unity frequency
reuse across all cells. This construction would result in the
highest spatial reuse but it tends to suffer from the typical
problem of Inter-Cell Interference (ICI) amongst neighbouring
cells. Following the traditional cellular design principle [118],
different (fractional) frequency reuse patterns could be used to
mitigate ICI, at the cost of a reduced bandwidth efficiency. An
effective method of improving the efficiency, whilst mitigating
the detrimental ICI is to employ cell merging [119], where a
group of neighbouring APs jointly form an enlarged VLC clus-
ter. In this way, the previously ICI-contaminated area becomes
the cluster-centre of the newly formed cluster. Multiple users
can be served simultaneously by using sophisticated Vectored
Transmission (VT) techniques. The underlying principle is to
totally eliminate the ICI at the multiple transmitters side by
using transmit pre-coding, so that the multiple users receive
mutually interference-free signals [120]. However, this tech-
nique requires that both Channel State Information (CSI) and
the users’ data have to be shared amongst multiple APs. All of
the above cell formations follow the conventional cell-centric
design approach, which is based on defining a cell constituted
by a fixed set of one or more APs and then associating the
users with it. By contrast, the newly proposed user-centric
design approach relies on the dynamic association between
APs and users [121]. More explicitly, by taking into account
the users’ geo-locations, the new user-centric design flow is
based on grouping the users together and then associating the
APs with them, leading to amorphous cells [122], which is
capable of supporting video service on the move [123]. Finally,
an intriguing piece of research emerges to consider the optimal
placement of LEDs [124], resulting into rich implications on
throughput, delay and mobility.
Holistically, owing to the existence of lightening infrastruc-
ture, Power-Line Communications (PLC) constitute a conve-
nient back-haul for VLC as indoor access technology [125],
[126]. PLC can reach luminaries that serve as VLC trans-
mitters to supply the data streams as well as to coordinate
transmission between multiple VLC transmitters to support
multi-user broadcasting [127]. The VLC transceivers can be
considered as relays that can operate in a full-duplex model
and different relaying paradigms such as amplify-and-forward
and decode-and-forward are possible [125]. From a network-
ing perspective, VLC can be considered as a new member in
the small-cell family of the Heterogeneous Networks (HetNet)
landscape for complementing the over-loaded Radio Access
Technology (RAT). Indeed, the interplay between VLC and
RAT system has been an active area of research [128], [129],
where there are two different interplay scenarios that may be
envisioned, namely single-homing and multi-homing. In the
single-homing scenario, only one access system is allowed
to maintain its association at any instant. In this scenario,
dynamic Load Balancing (LB) will prevent traffic congestion
caused by blockage or mobility through diverting the traffic
flow appropriately [130]. To better exploit the access system’s
diversity potentials, in the multi-homing scenario, each user
maintains multiple associations at the same time by using the
Multipath Transport Control Protocol (TCP) to connect mul-
tiple interfaces [131]. In either scenario, robust vertical han-
dover has to be properly designed to mitigate any ping-pong
effect, where the load-ware mobility management appears to
be a promising solution [132]. Different from using higher
layer converging approaches, seamless rate adaptation between
VLC and RAT systems may also be achieved by network
coding and rate-less coding [133]. To sum up, in the light of
the information and communications technology convergence,
the above mentioned network layer functions should be soft-
ware defined to maximise its full potential [134], [135].
III. CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
A. Challenges
1) Channel Modelling: Most of the current channel mod-
elling in VLC was directly adapted from the IR communi-
cations. However, it would be ideal to develop specific VLC
channel modelling, corresponding to different types of LEDs
for the ease of cross-calibration. In particular, with regards
to shadowing, there is a lack of both empirical and statistical
modelling. In most of the studies, the shadowing effect was
often assumed to follow the over-simplified Bernoulli distri-
bution. However, given the sensitivity of VLC over shadowing
in all aspects of localisation, communications and networking,
a well-calibrated model is indeed of critical importance. Also
importantly, VLC channel modelling for vehicular applications
is still in its infancy, which requires dedicated efforts.
2) Interference Mitigation and Management: VLC relies
on visible light spectrum which overlaps with solar radiation
and indoor/outdoor lighting and display. A VLC system is
inevitably interfered by those sources, from day and night
time. Therefore, effective techniques are needed to mitigate
not only inter-system interference from neighbouring LEDs,
but also external light interference. Considering those inter-
ference sources typically emit a large dynamic range of light
intensities, a robust and sensitive detector needs to respond
reliably to transmitted signals while suppressing interference
to certain extent. It is necessary but very challenging to
develop advanced methods and algorithms to recover useful
signals, weak or strong, from noisy signals overwhelmed by
interference, weak or strong. For example, normal operation of
a vehicular receiver or an indoor receiver under direct sunlight
through a window at noon is extremely difficult.
3) Channel Feedback: Several contributions make a mas-
sive use of channel state information. While this aspect is
not critical in approaches that move all the processing toward
the receiver since estimation techniques are not so difficult
to implement both with training-based or (semi)-blind, when
the communications requires a feedback link, as for pre-
equalization, bit loading, retransmission schemes, the feedback
channel performance becomes an issue. The problem of how
a feedback channel is used is a very challenging task either if
it is an optical one and if it is based on RF. In fact, important
aspects for example quantisation and error control must be
properly taken into account, in addition to delay and jitter.
4) Access Techniques: A high percentage of access tech-
niques proposed in the literature and described above start
from the tentative of adapting access mechanisms and proce-
dures already used in the RF for implementing them into the
VLC context. However, mechanisms that take into account
the fact that VLC receivers usually have one or more photo-
detectors that are not omnidirectional as well as for emerging
VLC applications such as vehicular and camera communica-
tions, should be investigated. Access techniques become more
complicated, when a user is covered by some LEDs in indoor
environment, due to the tilt of the device, the signal can be
received from another set of LEDs. Hence, access techniques
are strictly related also to the localisation techniques.
5) Mobility Management: In many VLC applications, VLC
terminals or transceivers are mobile, such as hand-held de-
vices, vehicles, and robots. Maintaining a quality communica-
tions link in a point-to-point case and network connectivity in
a multiple-user case are important to avoid communications
losses. Protocols for mobile optical wireless communication
networks are in urgent need, for dynamic system resource
adaptation to communications environments, easy node access
and drop-off, smooth handover from one AP to another and
from one network to another. Meanwhile, mobility prediction
and network topology modelling are under-explored, and these
topics open new room for further investigation.
6) Integrated Smart Lighting: Since VLC is not a paradigm
separated from illumination, the ultimate future challenge can
be a full integration that takes into account not only communi-
cations performance related to the single link under illumina-
tion constraints but also a holistic optimisation regarding both
the networking (system performance and seamless handover)
and the perceived illumination (a good level of light all over
the room). This is an issue especially in large rooms such
as museums, where multimedia content may be based on the
position of the user in the information centric system. Hence,
the aim is to integrate lighting, communications, networking
and positioning in a single homogeneous framework.
B. Opportunities
1) 5G-Home: The concept of 5G-Home is based on the
unified heterogeneous access-home network with wired and
(optical) wireless connectivity, which is capable of creating
tens of millions of additional 5G-Home sites. Technically, to
succeed in a timely and affordable manner, both the existing
copper or cable based fixed access and in-home wiring tech-
nique need to be exploited in addition to fibre [136], [137].
Deep in the home, the number of wireless APs and terminals
will be going up corresponding to the increasing bandwidth,
delay and coverage requirements. At least one AP per room
may become the norm given the higher carrier frequencies that
will be used for 5G, including Wi-Fi standards 802.11ac/ad
and VLC aided networking [138], [139]. Hence, we envision
beneficial convergence between fixed access network infras-
tructure and in-home (optical) wireless networks, in order to
eliminate the boundary between these two domains [140].
2) 5G-Vehicle: Future 5G systems will embody a number
of new applications which span across vast areas beyond en-
hanced mobile broadband services, such as media distribution,
Smart Cities, and Internet of Things (IoT). In Smart Cities,
light-enabled vehicular communications networks utilize a
large number of densely distributed street lamp poles as
APs, while vehicular lights, roadside street lights, pedestrian
signage and traffic lights can all act as ubiquitous trans-
mitters to meet the need of massive connectivity and high
throughput [141], [142]. Equipped with image sensor or other
types of receivers, these nodes in the immediate vicinity
of vehicles provide ultra-reliable and low latency (mission
critical) communications and control links [143], [144], which
will serve well intelligent transportation, collision avoidance,
autonomous driving and telematics. However, challenges will
arise when experiencing strong ambient noise, while uneven
speed and diverting route may be also difficult to handle [145],
[146]. Nevertheless, vehicles become mobile offices and en-
tertaining homes, enjoying amount of exterior resources.
3) Underwater Communications: In addition to ground-
based indoor and outdoor applications, VLC also paves the
way for outreach applications deep into water. Currently,
underwater acoustics is the major wireless technology for
underwater object detection and communications. Due to the
very low data rate allowed by acoustic communications in
underwater environment and also the poor performance from
the propagation point of view in the RF bands, light sources
offer a unique opportunity for short-range high speed commu-
nications potentially at low cost and low power [147], [148],
[149], [150]. Data rate of hundreds to thousands of Mbps is
possible, and the communications distance is extendible to
hundreds of meters in clear water. The VLC technology will
undoubtedly play a critical role in marine resource exploration,
water sensing, monitoring and tracking of marine organism,
and saving endangered species.
4) Emerging Applications: LEDs are natural cheap commu-
nications transmitters, and CMOS image sensors are equipped
in pervasive consumer electronics as detectors. New applica-
tions emerge with these tiny optical sensors. Image Sensor
Communications (ISC) and positioning is easily realized based
on CMOS sensors built upon smart phones. Millions of pixels
can be maximally explored for communications [151] and
accurate positioning [152]. The LED screen-to-camera com-
munications constitute another interesting application, which
may facilitate unimaginable potentials in entertainment, educa-
tion, broadcasting and near-field communications, etc. Several
early experiments have been already carried out with excit-
ing findings, including projects of SoftLight [153], Uber-in-
light [154] and SBVLC [155] etc. In addition to traditional
LEDs, emerging Organic LEDs (OLEDs) are attractive in
flexibility, easy integration and fabrication, convenient color
selectivity, and wide viewing angle. Thus they serve as wear-
able and portable VLC transmitters as well as fixed-location
large screen communication transmitters [156], [157], [158].
Application domains encompass those of LEDs as well as new
body area networks and sensor networks. Last but not least,
LED based lighting infrastructures are becoming ubiquitous
and have already been dubbed as the ‘eyes and ears of the
IoT’ in the context of smart lighting systems. Hence, VLC is a
promising solution for indoor communications to a broad class
of smart objects in particular in scenarios with high density
of IoT devices. Steps along this direction have been presented
in [159], [160], [161].
5) Commercialisation: To create a larger economic and
societal impact, the above mentioned academic research has
to be in collaboration with industries. More importantly, the
future success of VLC urges the joint efforts from both infor-
mation industry and illumination industry, driven by demands
from verticals, such as health, automotive, manufacturing,
entertainment etc. The inclusive of mobile phones within
the ecosystem would be highly desirable to the wide public
acceptance. One promising area for real-world VLC to grow
is the future pervasive IoT in consumer electronics, retailers,
warehouses, offices and hospitals, etc. For example, Philips
has recently commercialised VLC aided indoor localisation for
the hypermarket in France 1. They have also teamed up with
Cisco on an exciting IoT project called ‘Digital Ceiling’ 2,
which connects all of a building’s services in a single and
converged network, where empowered LEDs can be used to
collect, send and analyse data.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper provides an overview on the localization, com-
munications and networking aspects of VLC, along with the
discussions on various challenges and opportunities. It is
envisioned that the future research of VLC will open up new
scientific areas in the wider academic context, which will
be extremely beneficial to the whole community. VLC will
create a unique opportunity to innovate all areas related to
the future evolution, deployment and operation of ultra-dense
small-cell networks, where potentially hundreds of people and
thousands of appliances will be connected. More broadly, VLC
will stimulate commercial solutions for supporting new killer
applications, facilitating innovations for entertainment, collab-
orative design and vehicular networking, etc. By simultane-
ously exploiting illumination and communications, VLC will
directly contribute towards the all-important ‘green’ agenda,
which has been one of the salient topics in the 21st-century.
REFERENCES
[1] M. K. Weldon, The Future X Network: A Bell Labs Perspective, 1st ed.
CRC Press, 2016.
[2] L. Hanzo, H. Haas, S. Imre, D. O’Brien, M. Rupp, and L. Gyongyosi,
“Wireless myths, realities, and futures: From 3G/4G to optical and
quantum wireless,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, no. Special
Centennial Issue, pp. 1853–1888, May 2012.
[3] T. S. Rappaport, S. Sun, R. Mayzus, H. Zhao, Y. Azar, K. Wang, G. N.
Wong, J. K. Schulz, M. Samimi, and F. Gutierrez, “Millimeter wave
mobile communications for 5G cellular: It will work!” IEEE Access,
vol. 1, pp. 335–349, 2013.
[4] S. Wu, H. Wang, and C. H. Youn, “Visible light communications for 5G
wireless networking systems: from fixed to mobile communications,”
IEEE Network, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 41–45, Nov 2014.
[5] A. G. Bell, “Upon the production and reproduction of sound by light,”
Journal of the Society of Telegraph Engineers, vol. 9, no. 34, pp. 404–
426, 1880.
[6] D. K. Jackson, T. K. Buffaloe, and S. B. Leeb, “Fiat lux: a fluorescent
lamp digital transceiver,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications,
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 625–630, May 1998.
[7] J. Y. Tsao, M. E. Coltrin, M. H. Crawford, and J. A. Simmons, “Solid-
state lighting: An integrated human factors, technology, and economic
perspective,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 98, no. 7, pp. 1162–1179,
July 2010.
1http://www.lighting.philips.co.uk/systems/themes/led-based-indoor-positioning.html
2http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/digital-ceiling/partner-ecosystem.html
[8] T. Komine and M. Nakagawa, “Fundamental analysis for visible-
light communication system using LED lights,” IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 100–107, Feb 2004.
[9] H. Burchardt, N. Serafimovski, D. Tsonev, S. Videv, and H. Haas,
“VLC: Beyond point-to-point communication,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 98–105, July 2014.
[10] J. Lim, “Ubiquitous 3D positioning systems by LED-based visible light
communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
80–85, Apr 2015.
[11] P. H. Pathak, X. Feng, P. Hu, and P. Mohapatra, “Visible light commu-
nication, networking, and sensing: A survey, potential and challenges,”
IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2047–
2077, Fourth Quarter 2015.
[12] S. Hranilovic, L. Lampe, and S. Hosur, “Visible light communications:
the road to standardization and commercialization (Part 1) [Guest
Editorial],” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 24–
25, Dec 2013.
[13] S. Hranilovic, L. Lampe, S. Hosur, and R. D. Roberts, “Visible light
communications: the road to standardization and commercialization
(Part 2) [Guest Editorial],” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52,
no. 7, pp. 62–63, July 2014.
[14] N. Chi, H. Haas, M. Kavehrad, T. D. C. Little, and X.-L. Huang, “Vis-
ible light communications: demand factors, benefits and opportunities
[Guest Editorial],” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
5–7, Apr 2015.
[15] M. H. Crawford, “LEDs for solid-state lighting: Performance chal-
lenges and recent advances,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1028–1040, July 2009.
[16] C. Lee, C. Zhang, M. Cantore, R. M. Farrell, S. H. Oh, T. Margalith,
J. S. Speck, S. Nakamura, J. E. Bowers, and S. P. DenBaars, “4 Gbps
direct modulation of 450nm GaN laser for high-speed visible light
communication,” Opt. Express, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 16 232–16 237, Jun
2015.
[17] I. C. Lu, C. H. Yeh, D. Z. Hsu, and C. W. Chow, “Utilization of 1-
GHz VCSEL for 11.1-Gbps OFDM VLC wireless communication,”
IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1–6, Jun 2016.
[18] S. Rajbhandari, H. Chun, G. Faulkner, K. Cameron, A. V. N. Jala-
jakumari, R. Henderson, D. Tsonev, M. Ijaz, Z. Chen, H. Haas,
E. Xie, J. J. D. McKendry, J. Herrnsdorf, E. Gu, M. D. Dawson,
and D. O’Brien, “High-speed integrated visible light communication
system: Device constraints and design considerations,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1750–1757,
Sep 2015.
[19] D. A. Steigerwald, J. C. Bhat, D. Collins, R. M. Fletcher, M. O.
Holcomb, M. J. Ludowise, P. S. Martin, and S. L. Rudaz, “Illumination
with solid state lighting technology,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics
in Quantum Electronics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 310–320, Mar 2002.
[20] H. L. Minh, D. O’Brien, G. Faulkner, L. Zeng, K. Lee, D. Jung,
and Y. Oh, “High-speed visible light communications using multiple-
resonant equalization,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 20,
no. 14, pp. 1243–1245, July 2008.
[21] H. L. Minh, D. O’Brien, G. Faulkner, L. Zeng, K. Lee, D. Jung, Y. Oh,
and E. T. Won, “100-Mb/s NRZ visible light communications using a
postequalized white LED,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 21,
no. 15, pp. 1063–1065, Aug 2009.
[22] M. Biagi, T. Borogovac, and T. D. C. Little, “Adaptive receiver for in-
door visible light communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 31, no. 23, pp. 3676–3686, Dec 2013.
[23] S. Muthu, F. J. P. Schuurmans, and M. D. Pashley, “Red, green, and
blue LEDs for white light illumination,” IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Quantum Electronics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 333–338, Mar 2002.
[24] G. Cossu, A. M. Khalid, P. Choudhury, R. Corsini, and E. Ciaramella,
“3.4 Gbit/s visible optical wireless transmission based on RGB LED,”
Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 26, pp. B501–B506, Dec 2012.
[25] J. J. D. McKendry, D. Massoubre, S. Zhang, B. R. Rae, R. P. Green,
E. Gu, R. K. Henderson, A. E. Kelly, and M. D. Dawson, “Visible-light
communications using a CMOS-controlled micro-light- emitting-diode
array,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 61–67, Jan
2012.
[26] R. X. G. Ferreira, E. Xie, J. J. D. McKendry, S. Rajbhandari, H. Chun,
G. Faulkner, S. Watson, A. E. Kelly, E. Gu, R. V. Penty, I. H. White,
D. C. OBrien, and M. D. Dawson, “High bandwidth GaN-based micro-
LEDs for multi-Gb/s visible light communications,” IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters, vol. 28, no. 19, pp. 2023–2026, Oct 2016.
[27] K. D. Dambul, D. C. O’Brien, and G. Faulkner, “Indoor optical wireless
MIMO system with an imaging receiver,” IEEE Photonics Technology
Letters, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 97–99, Jan 2011.
[28] S. Hranilovic and F. R. Kschischang, “A pixelated MIMO wireless
optical communication system,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 859–874, July 2006.
[29] R. Boubezari, H. L. Minh, Z. Ghassemlooy, and A. Bouridane,
“Smartphone camera based visible light communication,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 17, pp. 4121–4127, Sep 2016.
[30] C. W. Chow, C. Y. Chen, and S. H. Chen, “Enhancement of signal
performance in LED visible light communications using mobile phone
camera,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 1–7, Oct 2015.
[31] J. Hao, Y. Yang, and J. Luo, “CeilingCast: Energy efficient and
location-bound broadcast through LED-camera communication,” in
IEEE INFOCOM 2016, Apr 2016, pp. 1–9.
[32] T. Q. Wang, Y. A. Sekercioglu, and J. Armstrong, “Analysis of an
optical wireless receiver using a hemispherical lens with application in
MIMO visible light communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technol-
ogy, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 1744–1754, Jun 2013.
[33] T. Chen, L. Liu, B. Tu, Z. Zheng, and W. Hu, “High-spatial-diversity
imaging receiver using Fisheye lens for indoor MIMO VLCs,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 26, no. 22, pp. 2260–2263, Nov
2014.
[34] T. Q. Wang, R. J. Green, and J. Armstrong, “MIMO optical wireless
communications using ACO-OFDM and a prism-array receiver,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1959–
1971, Sep 2015.
[35] Y. Liu, H. Y. Chen, K. Liang, C. W. Hsu, C. W. Chow, and C. H. Yeh,
“Visible light communication using receivers of camera image sensor
and solar cell,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–7, Feb
2016.
[36] W. A. Cahyadi, Y. H. Kim, Y. H. Chung, and C. J. Ahn, “Mobile
phone camera-based indoor visible light communications with rotation
compensation,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1–8, Apr
2016.
[37] T. Q. Wang, C. He, and J. Armstrong, “Performance analysis of
aperture-based receivers for MIMO IM/DD visible light communica-
tions,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, early access.
[38] Z. Zhou, C. Chen, and M. Kavehrad, “Impact analyses of high-
order light reflections on indoor optical wireless channel model and
calibration,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 32, no. 10, pp.
2003–2011, May 2014.
[39] K. Lee, H. Park, and J. R. Barry, “Indoor channel characteristics for
visible light communications,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 217–219, Feb 2011.
[40] F. Miramirkhani and M. Uysal, “Channel modeling and characterization
for visible light communications,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 7,
no. 6, pp. 1–16, Dec 2015.
[41] P. Chvojka, S. Zvanovec, P. A. Haigh, and Z. Ghassemlooy, “Channel
characteristics of visible light communications within dynamic indoor
environment,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 9, pp.
1719–1725, May 2015.
[42] Q. Gao, S. Hu, C. Gong, and Z. Xu, “Modulation designs for visible
light communications with signal-dependent noise,” Journal of Light-
wave Technology, vol. 34, no. 23, pp. 5516–5525, Dec 2016.
[43] J. L. Volakis, A. J. O’Brien, and C. C. Chen, “Small and adaptive
antennas and arrays for GNSS applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 104, no. 6, pp. 1221–1232, Jun 2016.
[44] H. Liu, H. Darabi, P. Banerjee, and J. Liu, “Survey of wireless indoor
positioning techniques and systems,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 37,
no. 6, pp. 1067–1080, Nov 2007.
[45] J. Armstrong, Y. A. Sekercioglu, and A. Neild, “Visible light position-
ing: a roadmap for international standardization,” IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 68–73, Dec 2013.
[46] J. Hu, C. Gong, and Z. Xu, “Demonstration of a robot controlling and
positioning system based on visible light,” in 2016 8th International
Conference on Wireless Communications Signal Processing (WCSP),
Oct 2016, pp. 1–6.
[47] D. Zheng, G. Chen, and J. A. Farrell, “Joint measurement and trajec-
tory recovery in visible light communication,” IEEE Transactions on
Control Systems Technology, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 247–261, Jan 2017.
[48] T. Q. Wang, Y. A. Sekercioglu, A. Neild, and J. Armstrong, “Position
accuracy of time-of-arrival based ranging using visible light with
application in indoor localization systems,” Journal of Lightwave
Technology, vol. 31, no. 20, pp. 3302–3308, Oct 2013.
[49] S. Y. Jung, S. Hann, and C. S. Park, “TDOA-based optical wireless
indoor localization using LED ceiling lamps,” IEEE Transactions on
Consumer Electronics, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1592–1597, Nov 2011.
[50] X. Zhang, J. Duan, Y. Fu, and A. Shi, “Theoretical accuracy analysis
of indoor visible light communication positioning system based on
received signal strength indicator,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 32, no. 21, pp. 4180–4186, Nov 2014.
[51] S. H. Yang, E. M. Jeong, and S. K. Han, “Indoor positioning based
on received optical power difference by angle of arrival,” Electronics
Letters, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 49–51, Jan 2014.
[52] S. H. Yang, H. S. Kim, Y. H. Son, and S. K. Han, “Three-dimensional
visible light indoor localization using AOA and RSS with multiple
optical receivers,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 32, no. 14,
pp. 2480–2485, July 2014.
[53] M. F. Keskin and S. Gezici, “Comparative theoretical analysis of
distance estimation in visible light positioning systems,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 854–865, Feb 2016.
[54] A. ahin, Y. S. Erolu, . Gven, N. Pala, and M. Yksel, “Hybrid 3-
D localization for visible light communication systems,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 22, pp. 4589–4599, Nov 2015.
[55] S. Feng, X. Li, R. Zhang, M. Jiang, and L. Hanzo, “Hybrid position-
ing aided amorphous-cell assisted user-centric visible light downlink
techniques,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 2705–2713, 2016.
[56] J. Y. Kim, S. H. Yang, Y. H. Son, and S. K. Han, “High-resolution
indoor positioning using light emitting diode visible light and camera
image sensor,” IET Optoelectronics, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 184–192, 2016.
[57] M. Yasir, S. W. Ho, and B. N. Vellambi, “Indoor positioning system us-
ing visible light and accelerometer,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 32, no. 19, pp. 3306–3316, Oct 2014.
[58] P. Huynh and M. Yoo, “VLC-based positioning system for an indoor
environment using an image sensor and an accelerometer sensor,”
Sensors, vol. 16, no. 6, p. 783, 2016.
[59] W. Gu, M. Aminikashani, P. Deng, and M. Kavehrad, “Impact of mul-
tipath reflections on the performance of indoor visible light positioning
systems,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 2578–
2587, May 2016.
[60] M. Biagi, S. Pergoloni, and A. M. Vegni, “LAST: A framework
to localize, access, schedule, and transmit in indoor VLC systems,”
Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1872–1887, May
2015.
[61] B. Fahs, A. J. Chowdhury, and M. M. Hella, “A 12-m 2.5-Gb/s lighting
compatible integrated receiver for OOK visible light communication
links,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 16, pp. 3768–
3775, Aug 2016.
[62] S. He, G. Ren, Z. Zhong, and Y. Zhao, “M-ary variable period
modulation for indoor visible light communication system,” IEEE
Communications Letters, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1325–1328, July 2013.
[63] J. H. Yoo, B. W. Kim, and S. Y. Jung, “Modelling and analysis of M-ary
variable pulse position modulation for visible light communications,”
IET Optoelectronics, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 184–190, 2015.
[64] E. Monteiro and S. Hranilovic, “Design and implementation of color-
shift keying for visible light communications,” Journal of Lightwave
Technology, vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 2053–2060, May 2014.
[65] J. Jiang, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Analysis and design of three-
stage concatenated color-shift keying,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 5126–5136, Nov 2015.
[66] Q. Gao, R. Wang, Z. Xu, and Y. Hua, “DC-informative joint color-
frequency modulation for visible light communications,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 2181–2188, Jun 2015.
[67] S. Pergoloni, M. Biagi, S. Rinauro, S. Colonnese, R. Cusani, and
G. Scarano, “Merging color shift keying and complementary pulse
position modulation for visible light illumination and communication,”
Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 192–200, Jan
2015.
[68] H. Chun, S. Rajbhandari, G. Faulkner, D. Tsonev, E. Xie, J. J. D.
McKendry, E. Gu, M. D. Dawson, D. C. O’Brien, and H. Haas,
“LED based wavelength division multiplexed 10 Gb/s visible light
communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 13,
pp. 3047–3052, July 2016.
[69] J. Armstrong, “OFDM for optical communications,” Journal of Light-
wave Technology, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 189–204, Feb 2009.
[70] R. Mesleh, H. Elgala, and H. Haas, “On the performance of different
OFDM based optical wireless communication systems,” IEEE/OSA
Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 3, no. 8,
pp. 620–628, Aug 2011.
[71] N. Fernando, Y. Hong, and E. Viterbo, “Flip-OFDM for unipolar com-
munication systems,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 60,
no. 12, pp. 3726–3733, Dec 2012.
[72] D. Tsonev, S. Videv, and H. Haas, “Unlocking spectral efficiency in
intensity modulation and direct detection systems,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1758–1770, Sep
2015.
[73] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Multi-layer modulation for intensity-
modulated direct-detection optical OFDM,” IEEE/OSA Journal of
Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no. 12, pp. 1402–
1412, Dec 2013.
[74] B. Ranjha and M. Kavehrad, “Hybrid asymmetrically clipped OFDM-
based IM/DD optical wireless system,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical
Communications and Networking, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 387–396, Apr 2014.
[75] Q. Gao, C. Gong, S. Li, and Z. Xu, “DC-informative modulation for
visible light communications under lighting constraints,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 54–60, Apr 2015.
[76] J. Wang, Y. Xu, X. Ling, R. Zhang, Z. Ding, and C. Zhao, “PAPR
analysis for OFDM visible light communication,” Optics Express,
vol. 24, no. 24, pp. 27 457–27 474, Nov 2016.
[77] S. Dimitrov, S. Sinanovic, and H. Haas, “Clipping noise in OFDM-
based optical wireless communication systems,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1072–1081, Apr 2012.
[78] S. Dimitrov and H. Haas, “Information rate of OFDM-based optical
wireless communication systems with nonlinear distortion,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 918–929, Mar 2013.
[79] H. Qian, S. J. Yao, S. Z. Cai, and T. Zhou, “Adaptive postdistortion
for nonlinear LEDs in visible light communications,” IEEE Photonics
Journal, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 1–8, Aug 2014.
[80] K. Ying, Z. Yu, R. J. Baxley, H. Qian, G. K. Chang, and G. T. Zhou,
“Nonlinear distortion mitigation in visible light communications,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 36–45, Apr 2015.
[81] M. S. A. Mossaad, S. Hranilovic, and L. Lampe, “Visible light
communications using OFDM and multiple LEDs,” IEEE Transactions
on Communications, vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 4304–4313, Nov 2015.
[82] L. Wu, Z. Zhang, J. Dang, and H. Liu, “Adaptive modulation schemes
for visible light communications,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 117–125, Jan 2015.
[83] J. Gancarz, H. Elgala, and T. D. C. Little, “Impact of lighting require-
ments on VLC systems,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51,
no. 12, pp. 34–41, Dec 2013.
[84] K. Kim, K. Lee, and K. Lee, “Appropriate RLL coding scheme for
effective dimming control in VLC,” Electronics Letters, vol. 52, no. 19,
pp. 1622–1624, 2016.
[85] X. Lu and J. L. Tiffany, “Achieving FEC and RLL for VLC: A
concatenated convolutional-miller coding mechanism,” IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1030–1033, May 2016.
[86] K. Lee and H. Park, “Modulations for visible light communications
with dimming control,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 23,
no. 16, pp. 1136–1138, Aug 2011.
[87] F. Zafar, D. Karunatilaka, and R. Parthiban, “Dimming schemes for
visible light communication: the state of research,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 29–35, Apr 2015.
[88] S. Rajagopal, R. D. Roberts, and S. K. Lim, “IEEE 802.15.7 visible
light communication: modulation schemes and dimming support,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 72–82, Mar 2012.
[89] Q. Wang, Z. Wang, and L. Dai, “Asymmetrical hybrid optical OFDM
for visible light communications with dimming control,” IEEE Pho-
tonics Technology Letters, vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 974–977, May 2015.
[90] Y. Yang, Z. Zeng, J. Cheng, and C. Guo, “An enhanced DCO-OFDM
scheme for dimming control in visible light communication systems,”
IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1–13, Jun 2016.
[91] S. H. Lee and J. K. Kwon, “Turbo code-based error correction scheme
for dimmable visible light communication systems,” IEEE Photonics
Technology Letters, vol. 24, no. 17, pp. 1463–1465, Sep 2012.
[92] S. Kim and S. Y. Jung, “Modified Reed Muller coding scheme made
from the bent function for dimmable visible light communications,”
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 11–13, Jan
2013.
[93] S. Kim, “Adaptive FEC codes suitable for variable dimming values
in visible light communication,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters,
vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 967–969, May 2015.
[94] S. Zhao, “A serial concatenation-based coding scheme for dimmable
visible light communication systems,” IEEE Communications Letters,
vol. 20, no. 10, pp. 1951–1954, Oct 2016.
[95] A. H. Azhar, T. A. Tran, and D. O’Brien, “A Gigabit/s indoor wireless
transmission using MIMO-OFDM visible-light communications,” IEEE
Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 171–174, Jan 2013.
[96] L. Zeng, D. C. O’Brien, H. L. Minh, G. E. Faulkner, K. Lee, D. Jung,
Y. Oh, and E. T. Won, “High data rate multiple input multiple output
(MIMO) optical wireless communications using white LED lighting,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 27, no. 9,
pp. 1654–1662, Dec 2009.
[97] C. He, T. Q. Wang, and J. Armstrong, “Performance of optical receivers
using photodetectors with different fields of view in a MIMO ACO-
OFDM system,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 33, no. 23, pp.
4957–4967, Dec 2015.
[98] A. Nuwanpriya, S. W. Ho, and C. S. Chen, “Indoor MIMO visible light
communications: Novel angle diversity receivers for mobile users,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 9,
pp. 1780–1792, Sep 2015.
[99] P. F. Mmbaga, J. Thompson, and H. Haas, “Performance analysis of
indoor diffuse VLC MIMO channels using angular diversity detectors,”
Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1254–1266, Feb
2016.
[100] M. Biagi, A. M. Vegni, S. Pergoloni, P. M. Butala, and T. D. C. Little,
“Trace-orthogonal PPM-space time block coding under rate constraints
for visible light communication,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 481–494, Jan 2015.
[101] W. O. Popoola, E. Poves, and H. Haas, “Error performance of gen-
eralised space shift keying for indoor visible light communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1968–1976,
May 2013.
[102] A. T. Hussein, M. T. Alresheedi, and J. M. H. Elmirghani, “Fast and ef-
ficient adaptation techniques for visible light communication systems,”
IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 8,
no. 6, pp. 382–397, Jun 2016.
[103] A. Mostafa and L. Lampe, “Physical-layer security for MISO visible
light communication channels,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1806–1818, Sept 2015.
[104] ——, “Optimal and robust beamforming for secure transmission in
MISO visible-light communication links,” IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, vol. 64, no. 24, pp. 6501–6516, Dec 2016.
[105] S. Ma, Z. L. Dong, H. Li, Z. Lu, and S. Li, “Optimal and robust secure
beamformer for indoor MISO visible light communication,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 21, pp. 4988–4998, Nov 2016.
[106] B. Li, J. Wang, R. Zhang, H. Shen, C. Zhao, and L. Hanzo, “Multiuser
MISO transceiver design for indoor downlink visible light commu-
nication under per-LED optical power constraints,” IEEE Photonics
Journal, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 1–15, Aug 2015.
[107] H. Haas, L. Yin, Y. Wang, and C. Chen, “What is LiFi?” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1533–1544, Mar 2016.
[108] Y. Hou, S. Xiao, H. Zheng, and W. Hu, “Multiple access scheme
based on block encoding time division multiplexing in an indoor
positioning system using visible light,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical
Communications and Networking, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 489–495, May
2015.
[109] A. Chaaban, Z. Rezki, and M. S. Alouini, “Fundamental limits of paral-
lel optical wireless channels: Capacity results and outage formulation,”
IEEE Transactions on Communications, early access.
[110] D. Bykhovsky and S. Arnon, “Multiple access resource allocation in
visible light communication systems,” Journal of Lightwave Technol-
ogy, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1594–1600, Apr 2014.
[111] H. Marshoud, V. M. Kapinas, G. K. Karagiannidis, and S. Muhaidat,
“Non-orthogonal multiple access for visible light communications,”
IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 51–54, Jan
2016.
[112] L. Yin, W. O. Popoola, X. Wu, and H. Haas, “Performance evaluation of
non-orthogonal multiple access in visible light communication,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 64, no. 12, pp. 5162–5175, Dec
2016.
[113] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “A unified treatment of superposition coding
aided communications: Theory and practice,” IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 503–520, Third Quarter 2011.
[114] O. Gonzlez, M. F. Guerra-Medina, I. R. Martn, F. Delgado, and
R. Prez-Jimnez, “Adaptive WHTS-assisted SDMA-OFDM scheme for
fair resource allocation in multi-user visible light communications,”
IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 8,
no. 6, pp. 427–440, Jun 2016.
[115] Y. A. Chen, Y. T. Chang, Y. C. Tseng, and W. T. Chen, “A framework
for simultaneous message broadcasting using CDMA-based visible
light communications,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 15, no. 12, pp.
6819–6827, Dec 2015.
[116] M. H. Shoreh, A. Fallahpour, and J. A. Salehi, “Design concepts and
performance analysis of multicarrier CDMA for indoor visible light
communications,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and
Networking, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 554–562, Jun 2015.
[117] C. G. Gavrincea, J. Baranda, and P. Henarejos, “Rapid prototyping
of standard-compliant visible light communications system,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 80–87, July 2014.
[118] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Wireless cellular networks,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 31–39, Dec 2010.
[119] R. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Xu, C. Zhao, and L. Hanzo, “Visible
light communications in heterogeneous networks: Paving the way for
user-centric design,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 8–16, Apr 2015.
[120] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Cooperative downlink multicell preprocessing
relying on reduced-rate back-haul data exchange,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 539–545, Feb 2011.
[121] X. Li, F. Jin, R. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Xu, and L. Hanzo, “Users first:
User-centric cluster formation for interference-mitigation in visible-
light networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 39–53, Jan 2016.
[122] R. Zhang, H. Claussen, H. Haas, and L. Hanzo, “Energy efficient visible
light communications relying on amorphous cells,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 894–906, Apr
2016.
[123] X. Li, Y. Huo, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “User-centric visible light
communications for energy-efficient scalable video streaming,” IEEE
Transactions on Green Communications and Networking, early access.
[124] S. Pergoloni, M. Biagi, S. Colonnese, R. Cusani, and G. Scarano,
“Optimized LEDs footprinting for indoor visible light communication
networks,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 532–
535, Feb 2016.
[125] H. Ma, L. Lampe, and S. Hranilovic, “Integration of indoor visible
light and power line communication systems,” in 2013 IEEE 17th
International Symposium on Power Line Communications and Its
Applications, March 2013, pp. 291–296.
[126] J. Song, W. Ding, F. Yang, H. Yang, B. Yu, and H. Zhang, “An
indoor broadband broadcasting system based on PLC and VLC,” IEEE
Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 299–308, Jun 2015.
[127] H. Ma, L. Lampe, and S. Hranilovic, “Coordinated broadcasting for
multiuser indoor visible light communication systems,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 3313–3324, Sept 2015.
[128] X. Bao, X. Zhu, T. Song, and Y. Ou, “Protocol design and capacity
analysis in hybrid network of visible light communication and OFDMA
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 4,
pp. 1770–1778, May 2014.
[129] S. Shao, A. Khreishah, M. Ayyash, M. B. Rahaim, H. Elgala, V. Jung-
nickel, D. Schulz, T. D. C. Little, J. Hilt, and R. Freund, “Design
and analysis of a visible-light-communication enhanced WiFi system,”
IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 7,
no. 10, pp. 960–973, Oct 2015.
[130] X. Li, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Cooperative load balancing in
hybrid visible light communications and WiFi,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 1319–1329, Apr 2015.
[131] F. Jin, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Resource allocation under delay-
guarantee constraints for heterogeneous visible-light and RF femtocell,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no. 2, pp.
1020–1034, Feb 2015.
[132] Y. Wang and H. Haas, “Dynamic load balancing with handover in
hybrid Li-Fi and Wi-Fi networks,” Journal of Lightwave Technology,
vol. 33, no. 22, pp. 4671–4682, Nov 2015.
[133] M. Wang, J. Wu, W. Yu, H. Wang, J. Li, J. Shi, and C. Luo,
“Efficient coding modulation and seamless rate adaptation for visible
light communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 86–93, Apr 2015.
[134] I. T. Haque and N. Abu-Ghazaleh, “Wireless software defined net-
working: A survey and taxonomy,” IEEE Communications Surveys and
Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2713–2737, Fourth Quarter 2016.
[135] A. S. Thyagaturu, A. Mercian, M. P. McGarry, M. Reisslein, and
W. Kellerer, “Software defined optical networks (SDONs): A compre-
hensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 18,
no. 4, pp. 2738–2786, Fourth Quarter 2016.
[136] S. Galli, K. J. Kerpez, H. Mariotte, and F. Moulin, “PLC-to-DSL
interference: Statistical model and impact on VDSL2, vectoring, and
G.Fast,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34,
no. 7, pp. 1992–2005, July 2016.
[137] F. Effenberger, “Future broadband access networks [point of view],”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 104, no. 11, pp. 2078–2081, Nov 2016.
[138] G. Dede, T. Kamalakis, and D. Varoutas, “Evaluation of optical
wireless technologies in home networking: An analytical hierarchy
process approach,” IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications and
Networking, vol. 3, no. 11, pp. 850–859, Nov 2011.
[139] M. Ayyash, H. Elgala, A. Khreishah, V. Jungnickel, T. Little, S. Shao,
M. Rahaim, D. Schulz, J. Hilt, and R. Freund, “Coexistence of WiFi
and LiFi toward 5G: concepts, opportunities, and challenges,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 64–71, Feb 2016.
[140] M. Maier, M. Chowdhury, B. P. Rimal, and D. P. Van, “The tactile
internet: vision, recent progress, and open challenges,” IEEE Commu-
nications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 138–145, May 2016.
[141] K. Cui, G. Chen, Z. Xu, and R. D. Roberts, “Traffic light to vehicle
visible light communication channel characterization,” Appl. Opt.,
vol. 51, no. 27, pp. 6594–6605, Sep 2012.
[142] M. Uysal, Z. Ghassemlooy, A. Bekkali, A. Kadri, and H. Menouar,
“Visible light communication for vehicular networking: Performance
study of a V2V system using a measured headlamp beam pattern
model,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 45–
53, Dec 2015.
[143] T. Yamazato, I. Takai, H. Okada, T. Fujii, T. Yendo, S. Arai, M. Andoh,
T. Harada, K. Yasutomi, K. Kagawa, and S. Kawahito, “Image-sensor-
based visible light communication for automotive applications,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 88–97, July 2014.
[144] Y. Goto, I. Takai, T. Yamazato, H. Okada, T. Fujii, S. Kawahito, S. Arai,
T. Yendo, and K. Kamakura, “A new automotive VLC system using
optical communication image sensor,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 1–17, June 2016.
[145] T. Yamazato, M. Kinoshita, S. Arai, E. Souke, T. Yendo, T. Fujii,
K. Kamakura, and H. Okada, “Vehicle motion and pixel illumination
modeling for image sensor based visible light communication,” IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 1793–
1805, Sep 2015.
[146] A. M. Cilean, M. Dimian, V. Popa, L. Chassagne, and B. Cagneau,
“Novel DSP receiver architecture for multi-channel visible light
communications in automotive applications,” IEEE Sensors Journal,
vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 3597–3602, May 2016.
[147] M. A. Khalighi, C. Gabriel, T. Hamza, S. Bourennane, P. Lon,
and V. Rigaud, “Underwater wireless optical communication: recent
advances and remaining challenges,” in 2014 16th International Con-
ference on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON), July 2014, pp. 1–4.
[148] W. Liu, D. Zou, P. Wang, Z. Xu, and L. Yang, “Wavelength dependent
channel characterization for underwater optical wireless communica-
tions,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing,
Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), Aug 2014, pp. 895–899.
[149] P. Wang, C. Li, B. Wang, and Z. Xu, “Real-time 25Mb/s data
transmission for underwater optical wireless communication using a
commercial blue LED and APD detection,” in Asia Communications
and Photonics Conference 2016. Optical Society of America, 2016,
p. AS2C.3.
[150] C. Li, B. Wang, P. Wang, Z. Xu, Q. Yang, and S. Yu, “Generation
and transmission of 745Mb/s ofdm signal using a single commercial
blue LED and an analog post-equalizer for underwater optical wireless
communications,” in Asia Communications and Photonics Conference
2016. Optical Society of America, 2016, p. AS3B.4.
[151] W. Huang, P. Tian, and Z. Xu, “Design and implementation of a
real-time CIM-MIMO optical camera communication system,” Opt.
Express, vol. 24, no. 21, pp. 24 567–24 579, Oct 2016.
[152] D. Li, W. Huang, and Z. Xu, “Flicker free indoor visible light
positioning system assisted by a filter and mobile phone camera,” in
2016 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China
(ICCC), July 2016, pp. 1–5.
[153] W. Du, J. C. Liando, and M. Li, “SoftLight: Adaptive visible light
communication over screen-camera links,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2016,
Apr 2016, pp. 1–9.
[154] M. Izz, Z. Li, H. Liu, Y. Chen, and F. Li, “Uber-in-light: Unobtrusive
visible light communication leveraging complementary color channel,”
in IEEE INFOCOM 2016, Apr 2016, pp. 1–9.
[155] B. Zhang, K. Ren, G. Xing, X. Fu, and C. Wang, “SBVLC: Secure
barcode-based visible light communication for smartphones,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 432–446, Feb
2016.
[156] H. Chun, C. J. Chiang, A. Monkman, and D. OBrien, “A study of
illumination and communication using organic light emitting diodes,”
Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 31, no. 22, pp. 3511–3517, Nov
2013.
[157] P. A. Haigh, Z. Ghassemlooy, I. Papakonstantinou, F. Arca, S. F. Tedde,
O. Hayden, and E. Leitgeb, “A 1-Mb/s visible light communications
link with low bandwidth organic components,” IEEE Photonics Tech-
nology Letters, vol. 26, no. 13, pp. 1295–1298, July 2014.
[158] H. Chen, S. Li, B. Huang, Z. Xu, W. Li, G. Dong, and J. Xie,
“A 1.9mbps OFDM-based all-organic visible light communication
system,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Communication
Systems (ICCS), Dec 2016, pp. 1–6.
[159] S. Schmid, T. Bourchas, S. Mangold, and T. R. Gross, “Linux light
bulbs: Enabling internet protocol connectivity for light bulb networks,”
in Proceedings of the 2Nd International Workshop on Visible Light
Communications Systems, ser. VLCS ’15. New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2015, pp. 3–8.
[160] J. Li, A. Liu, G. Shen, L. Li, C. Sun, and F. Zhao, “Retro-VLC: En-
abling battery-free duplex visible light communication for mobile and
IoT applications,” in Proceedings of the 16th International Workshop
on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, ser. HotMobile ’15.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2015, pp. 21–26.
[161] K. Warmerdam, A. Pandharipande, and D. Caicedo, “Connectivity in
IoT indoor lighting systems with visible light communications,” in
2015 IEEE Online Conference on Green Communications (Online-
GreenComm), Nov 2015, pp. 47–52.
[162] R. Zhang, Y. Cui, H. Claussen, H. Haas, and L. Hanzo, “Anticipatory
association for indoor visible light communications: Light, follow me
!” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, submitted.
[163] R. Zhang, M. Biagi, L. Lampe, T. D. Little, S. Mangold, and Z. Xu,
“Localisation, communication and networking with VLC: Challenges
and opportunities,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions, submitted.
[164] R. Zhang, A. F. A. Rawi, L. D. Humphrey, and L. Hanzo, “Expanded
constellation mapping for enhanced far-end-cross-talk cancellation in
G.fast,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 56–59, Jan
2017.
[165] R. Zhang, L. L. Yang, and L. Hanzo, “Performance analysis of
non-linear generalized pre-coding aided spatial modulation,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 6731–
6741, Oct 2016.
[166] ——, “Energy pattern aided simultaneous wireless information and
power transfer,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 33, no. 8, pp. 1492–1504, Aug 2015.
[167] R. Zhang, R. G. Maunder, and L. Hanzo, “Wireless information and
power transfer: from scientific hypothesis to engineering practice,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 99–105, August
2015.
[168] R. Zhang, L. L. Yang, and L. Hanzo, “Error probability and capacity
analysis of generalised pre-coding aided spatial modulation,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 364–
375, Jan 2015.
[169] ——, “Generalised pre-coding aided spatial modulation,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Wireless Communications, vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 5434–5443,
November 2013.
[170] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Advances in base- and mobile-station aided
cooperative wireless communications: An overview,” IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 57–69, March 2013.
[171] ——, “Multiple-source cooperation: From code-division multiplexing
to variable-rate network coding,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 1005–1015, March 2011.
[172] ——, “Superposition-aided delay-constrained hybrid automatic repeat
request,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 59, no. 4,
pp. 2109–2115, May 2010.
[173] R. Zhang, L. Xu, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “EXIT-chart-aided hybrid
multiuser detector for multicarrier interleave-division multiple access,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1563–
1567, March 2010.
[174] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Interleaved random space time coding for
multisource cooperation,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2120–2125, May 2009.
[175] ——, “Superposition-coding-aided multiplexed hybrid ARQ scheme
for improved end-to-end transmission efficiency,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 4681–4686, Oct 2009.
[176] ——, “Coding schemes for energy efficient multi-source cooperation
aided uplink transmission,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 16,
no. 5, pp. 438–441, May 2009.
[177] ——, “Iterative multiuser detection and channel decoding for DS-
CDMA using harmony search,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters,
vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 917–920, Oct 2009.
[178] ——, “Three design aspects of multicarrier interleave division multiple
access,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 57, no. 6,
pp. 3607–3617, Nov 2008.
[179] ——, “Space-time coding for high-throughput interleave division mul-
tiplexing aided multi-source co-operation,” Electronics Letters, vol. 44,
no. 5, pp. 367–368, Feb 2008.
[180] J. Zhang, R. Zhang, R. G. Maunder, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Adaptive
coding and modulation for large-scale antenna array based aeronautical
communications in the presence of co-channel interference,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, submitted.
[181] Q. Wang, R. Zhang, L. L. Yang, and L. Hanzo, “Non-orthogonal mul-
tiple access: A unified perspective,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
submitted.
[182] S. Gupta, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Energy harvesting aided device-to-
device communication in the heterogeneous two-tier downlink,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, submitted.
[183] Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Yang, X. Gao, B. Zhu, W. Cai, J. Yuan, R. Zhang,
and H. Zhu, “Simultaneous light emission and detection of InGaN/GaN
multiple quantum well diodes for in-plane visible light communica-
tion,” Optics Communications, (early access), 2016.
[184] S. Gupta, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Energy harvesting aided device-
to-device communication underlaying the cellular downlink,” IEEE
Access, (early access), 2016.
[185] F. Jin, X. Li, R. Zhang, C. Dong, and L. Hanzo, “Resource allocation
under delay-guarantee constraints for visible-light communication,”
IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 7301–7312, 2016.
[186] B. Li, R. Zhang, W. Xu, C. Zhao, and L. Hanzo, “Joint dimming control
and transceiver design for MIMO-aided visible light communication,”
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 2193–2196, Nov
2016.
[187] S. Gupta, S. Kumar, R. Zhang, S. Kalyani, K. Giridhar, and L. Hanzo,
“Resource allocation for D2D links in the FFR and SFR aided cellular
downlink,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 64, no. 10, pp.
4434–4448, Oct 2016.
[188] S. Gupta, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Throughput maximization for a
buffer-aided successive relaying network employing energy harvest-
ing,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 8, pp.
6758–6765, Aug 2016.
[189] J. Jiang, P. Zhang, R. Zhang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Aperture
selection for ACO-OFDM in free-space optical turbulence channel,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 6089–
6100, Aug 2016.
[190] C. Zhu, Y. Huo, J. Jiang, H. Sun, C. Dong, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo,
“Hierarchical colour-shift-keying aided layered video streaming for the
visible light downlink,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 3127–3152, 2016.
[191] C. Zhu, Y. Huo, B. Zhang, R. Zhang, M. El-Hajjar, and L. Hanzo,
“Adaptive-truncated-HARQ-aided layered video streaming relying on
interlayer fec coding,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 1506–1521, March 2016.
[192] F. Wu, R. Zhang, L. L. Yang, and W. Wang, “Transmitter precoding-
aided spatial modulation for secrecy communications,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 467–471, Jan 2016.
[193] J. Feng, R. Zhang, L. Hanzo, and S. X. Ng, “Cooperative medium
access control based on spectrum leasing,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 297–307, Jan 2014.
[194] J. Zhang, F. Jin, R. Zhang, G. Li, and L. Hanzo, “Analysis and design
of distributed antenna-aided twin-layer femto- and macrocell networks
relying on fractional frequency reuse,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 763–774, Feb 2014.
[195] F. Jin, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Fractional frequency reuse aided twin-
layer femtocell networks: Analysis, design and optimization,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2074–2085, May
2013.
[196] J. Zhang, R. Zhang, G. Li, and L. Hanzo, “Distributed antenna
systems in fractional-frequency-reuse-aided cellular networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 1340–1349,
March 2013.
[197] L. Li, X. Zhou, R. Zhang, D. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Performance and
capacity analysis of poisson photon-counting based iter-PIC OCDMA
systems,” Optics Express, vol. 21, no. 22, pp. 25 954–25 967, Nov 2013.
[198] X. Zhou, X. Zheng, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Chip-interleaved optical
code division multiple access relying on a photon-counting iterative
successive interference canceller for free-space optical channels,” Op-
tics Express, vol. 21, no. 13, pp. 15 926–15 937, Jul 2013.
[199] X. Zhou, D. Zhang, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “A photon-counting
spatial-diversity-and-multiplexing MIMO scheme for poisson atmo-
spheric channels relying on Q-ary PPM,” Optics Express, vol. 20,
no. 24, pp. 26 379–26 393, Nov 2012.
[200] J. Zhang, R. Zhang, G. Li, and L. Hanzo, “Remote coalition network
elements for base station cooperation aided multicell processing,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 1406–1415,
March 2012.
[201] J. Feng, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “A spectrum leasing cooperative
medium access protocol and its stability analysis,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3718–3730, Oct 2012.
[202] X. Xu, R. Zhang, S. Ghafoor, and L. Hanzo, “Imperfect digital-
fiber-optic-link-based cooperative distributed antennas with fractional
frequency reuse in multicell multiuser networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 4439–4449, Nov 2011.
[203] N. Bonello, R. Zhang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Channel code-division
multiple access and its multilevel-structured LDPC-based instantia-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 58, no. 5, pp.
2549–2553, Jun 2009.
[204] ——, “Reconfigurable rateless codes,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 8, no. 11, pp. 5592–5600, November 2009.
[205] X. Li, F. Jin, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Joint cluster formation and
user association under delay guarantees in visible-light networks,” in
2016 IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Dec (early access)
2016.
[206] X. Li, R. Zhang, J. Wang, and L. Hanzo, “Cell-centric and user-centric
multi-user scheduling in visible light communication aided networks,”
in 2015 IEEE International Conference on Communications, June
2015, pp. 5120–5125.
[207] J. Zhang, R. Zhang, G. Li, and L. Hanzo, “Coalition network elements
for base station cooperation,” in 2012 IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference Fall, Sept 2012, pp. 1–5.
[208] F. Jin, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Frequency-swapping aided femtocells
in twin-layer cellular networks relying on fractional frequency reuse,”
in 2012 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference,
April 2012, pp. 3097–3101.
[209] J. Zhang, R. Zhang, X. Xu, G. Li, and L. Hanzo, “Effects of practical
impairments on cooperative distributed antennas combined with frac-
tional frequency reuse,” in 2012 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference, April 2012, pp. 1088–1092.
[210] X. Xu, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Digital RoF aided cooperative
distributed antennas with FFR in multicell multiuser networks,” in 2011
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference Fall, Sept 2011, pp. 1–5.
[211] J. Feng, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Auction-style cooperative medium
access control,” in 2011 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference Fall,
Sept 2011, pp. 1–5.
[212] J. Feng, R. Zhang, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Relay selection for energy-
efficient cooperative media access control,” in 2011 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference, March 2011, pp. 287–
292.
[213] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Variable-rate network coding for multi-source
cooperation,” in 2011 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference, March 2011, pp. 1517–1522.
[214] R. Zhang, K. Giridhar, and L. Hanzo, “Distributed downlink multi-cell
processing requiring reduced-rate back-haul data exchange,” in 2011
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, March
2011, pp. 1277–1281.
[215] R. Zhang, X. Xu, and L. Hanzo, “Co-channel interference mitigation
capability of fixed relays connected by optical fibre,” in 2010 IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference Fall, Sept 2010, pp. 1–5.
[216] X. Xu, R. Zhang, and L. Hanzo, “Imperfect radio over fibre aided
distributed antennas with fractional frequency reuse,” in 2010 IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference Fall, Sept 2010, pp. 1–5.
[217] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Joint and distributed linear precoding for
centralised and decentralised multicell processing,” in 2010 IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference Fall, Sept 2010, pp. 1–5.
[218] ——, “Harmony search aided iterative channel estimation, multiuser
detection and channel decoding for DS-CDMA,” in 2010 IEEE Vehic-
ular Technology Conference Fall, Sept 2010, pp. 1–5.
[219] ——, “Multiplexed hybrid ARQ for energy efficient transmissions
under delay constraints,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Communications, May 2010, pp. 1–5.
[220] M. F. U. Butt, R. Zhang, S. X. Ng, and L. Hanzo, “Superposition coding
aided bi-directional relay transmission employing iteratively decoded
self-concatenated convolutional codes,” in 2010 IEEE Vehicular Tech-
nology Conference Spring, May 2010, pp. 1–5.
[221] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Superposition-coding aided multiplexed
hybrid ARQ scheme for improved link-layer transmission efficiency,” in
2009 IEEE International Conference on Communications, June 2009,
pp. 1–5.
[222] N. Bonello, R. Zhang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Reconfigurable rateless
codes,” in 2009 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference Spring, April
2009, pp. 1–5.
[223] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Physical-layer algebraic network coding and
superposition coding for the multi-source cooperation aided uplink,” in
2009 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference Spring, April 2009, pp.
1–5.
[224] ——, “High-throughput non-orthogonal interleaved random space-time
coding for multi-source cooperation,” in 2008 IEEE Global Telecom-
munications Conference, Nov 2008, pp. 1–5.
[225] N. Bonello, R. Zhang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Channel code division
multiple access and its multilevel structured LDPC based instantiation,”
in 2008 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference Fall, Sept 2008, pp.
1–5.
[226] R. Zhang, L. Xu, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “Repeat accumulate code
division multiple access and its hybrid detection,” in 2008 IEEE
International Conference on Communications, May 2008, pp. 4790–
4794.
[227] L. Xu, R. Zhang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “EXIT-chart aided hybrid
multiuser detector design for frequency-domain-spread chip-interleaved
MC-CDMA,” in 2008 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference Spring,
May 2008, pp. 1816–1820.
[228] R. Zhang and L. Hanzo, “Interleave division multiplexing aided space-
time coding for high-throughput uplink cooperative communications,”
in 2008 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference,
March 2008, pp. 465–469.
[229] ——, “EXIT chart based joint code-rate and spreading-factor optimi-
sation of single-carrier interleave division multiple access,” in 2007
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, March
2007, pp. 735–739.
