ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS 1
Quantifying Facial Age by Posterior of
Age Comparisons
Yunxuan Zhang1
zhangyunxuan@sensetime.com
Li Liu1
liuli@sensetime.com
Cheng Li1
chengli@sensetime.com
Chen Change Loy2
ccloy@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
1 SenseTime Group Limited
2 Department of Information Engineering,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
Abstract
We introduce a novel approach for annotating large quantity of in-the-wild facial
images with high-quality posterior age distribution as labels. Each posterior provides a
probability distribution of estimated ages for a face. Our approach is motivated by ob-
servations that it is easier to distinguish who is the older of two people than to determine
the person’s actual age. Given a reference database with samples of known ages and
a dataset to label, we can transfer reliable annotations from the former to the latter via
human-in-the-loop comparisons. We show an effective way to transform such compar-
isons to posterior via fully-connected and SoftMax layers, so as to permit end-to-end
training in a deep network. Thanks to the efficient and effective annotation approach, we
collect a new large-scale facial age dataset, dubbed ‘MegaAge’, which consists of 41,941
images1. With the dataset, we train a network that jointly performs ordinal hyperplane
classification and posterior distribution learning. Our approach achieves state-of-the-
art results on popular benchmarks such as MORPH2, Adience, and the newly proposed
MegaAge.
1 Introduction
Is there a moment when you try to guess the age of your new friend or a stranger and you
seriously doubt your estimation? You may try very hard to find clues on his/her face – deter-
mining the number of wrinkles surround the eyes or sagging skin above the upper eyelids.
Even with multiple trials, your guess sometimes may still far from the true answer.
The aforementioned difficulty is frequently encountered during the preparation of facial
age datasets, which are needed for training models for automatic facial age estimation. Given
face samples whose age is unknown, it is notoriously hard and unreliable to label them with
actual age. The best we can do is resort to providing approximate age range annotation,
which is adopted by Adience dataset [3], one of the largest in-the-wild facial age databases.
c© 2017. The copyright of this document resides with its authors.
It may be distributed unchanged freely in print or electronic forms.
1Data can be downloaded from our project page http://mmlab.ie.cuhk.edu.hk/projects/
MegaAge/ and http://github.com/zyx2012/Age_estimation_BMVC2017.
ar
X
iv
:1
70
8.
09
68
7v
1 
 [
cs
.C
V
] 
 3
1 
A
ug
 2
01
7
2 ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS
Actual Age
Age Range
Age Posterior
(Proposed)
Face Face Face
(a) Different types of age estimations
Test Images
(b) Comparing the outputs of baseline and proposed approach
Baseline Proposed
Age Posterior
20
HyperplaneHyperplane
4
0-2
45
38-43
1.1 41.3
8-13
11.2
Figure 1: (a) Comparing the proposed target annotation (also the prediction) with existing
schemes. In contrast to current schemes that either provide an actual age label or age range,
we introduce a new annotation that faithfully captures the distribution of estimated ages.
The annotation can be obtained from age comparisons between query and reference images.
(b) We propose a network that can jointly estimate ordinal classifications and age posterior
distribution as outputs.
An alternative is to collect photos from subjects whose age is known. Under such restrictions,
the sample size is usually small and the images are constrained by the environment from
which we capture them. It is thus inevitably hard to generalise a model learned from such a
dataset to novel scenes. Early databases, such as MORPH [18] and FG-NET [17], fall into
this category.
While it is hard to guess the actual age of an individual, one may find it effortless to tell
apart who is elder or younger when two persons stand next to each other. Age comparison
is usually deemed easier since we can use the appearance of a person as a reference while
examining the other. Nevertheless, it remains an open problem on how we can exploit such
comparisons as ground-truths for training a robust and accurate age estimation model. In
this paper, we introduce an effective way of exploiting age comparisons for labelling massive
quantity of in-the-wild face images. We further propose a new paradigm for mapping a series
of such comparisons to meaningful age distribution posterior that can be used to train an age
estimation deep network in an end-to-end manner. We detail our contributions as follows.
1) New large-scale age posterior dataset - As the first contribution of this study, we propose
a novel age annotation approach given face images collected in the wild. Specifically, we
first conduct a user study and show that humans are poor in guessing the actual age of a face
but they perform much better at comparing the age of two faces. The observation then leads
to our new approach – given an image with unknown age, we compare the image with some
selected images from a reference database with known age labels. We treat each comparison
as an independent random event and determine the age distribution as the posterior given
multiple observed events. The posterior is set as the target label of the image. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), the posterior faithfully reflects the true age with an estimated range to cap-
ture uncertainty, which otherwise cannot be achieved by existing annotation schemes. The
proposed approach enables us to extend reliable age annotations from any existing datasets
(e.g., FG-NET [17]), which are captured in constrained environments, to a massive in-the-
wild dataset with human-in-the-loop. The resulting dataset, called MegaAge, consists of
41,941 faces annotated with age posterior distributions. The images are randomly selected
from MegaFace [12] and YFCC100M [15] dataset.
2) Joint cost sensitive and posterior losses - The second contribution of this work is a new
deep convolutional network architecture that learns from age posterior distribution. The net-
ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS 3
work also generates age posterior as its output. The network is inspired by existing ordinal
hyperplane methods [1, 14, 16], which learn multiple binary ‘is this face older than age k?’
classifiers for each possible age k. Ordinal hyperplane method has shown powerful capa-
bility of keeping ordinal information of age labels. Extending from the idea, our network
consists of a ordinal hyperplane module that captures ordinal information. Different from
ordinal hyperplane methods, our network further maps the responses of the module to gen-
erate age posterior distribution. We show that the mapping can be accomplished by using
a fully-connected layer and a softmax layer. The proposed network is unique in that it can
be jointly trained with two losses, namely, the cost sensitive loss that is typically applied for
learning an ordinal hyperplanes ranker [1], and the newly proposed Kullback-Leibler (KL)
divergence loss that supervises the learning of posterior distribution. The two losses are
complementary in nature. The cost sensitive loss enforces the learning of ordinal relation-
ships, while the KL divergence loss ensures the estimated age to fall within a distribution and
captures uncertainties. In addition, with the KL divergence loss, our network can generate
smoother ordinal classifications (as a side product) in comparison to conventional ordinal
hyperplane methods, as shown in Fig. 1(b).
Extensive experiments are conducted on MORPH2, Adience and MegaAge datasets.
Thanks to the novel annotation approach, we collected a large quantity of training samples
with good quality to train the proposed network. Our approach outperforms state-of-the-
art approaches by reducing over 12% and 10% exact error on the MORPH2 [16] and Adi-
ence [13] datasets, respectively2. We also set a new benchmark on the proposed MegaAge.
2 Quantifying Age Posterior from Age Comparisons
In this section, we first present a user study and then discuss how we could employ the
observations of the user study and present our approach for mapping age comparisons to age
posterior distribution.
2.1 How Good can Human Predict Facial Age?
Test I - Guessing Actual Age: In the first experiment, we asked 30 volunteers to guess the
actual age given face images randomly drawn from the FG-NET [17] dataset. All participants
were not familiar with the dataset. A total of 1002 images were presented to each of the
participants. Figure 2(a) shows the results. The participants were fairly poor at estimating
the actual age through face appearance on this dataset. The average recall rate within an ±3
years old is only 43.2%.
Test II - Comparing Age: In the second experiments, the same group of participants were
asked to compare the age of two faces from FG-NET. Figure 2(b) shows the relationship
between age difference (face A minus face B), and the probability that participants find A is
older than B. It is observed that when the age difference is over 10 years, participants gained
over 95% accuracy in predicting the relative age order. Even when the age difference is only
5 years, participants still performed well with an accuracy of 85%.
Discussion: Albeit the performances of the two tests are not directly comparable due to their
different natures, the study does reflect that humans are more comfortable in telling apart
persons of different ages, especially when the age difference is large. Another important
2On MORPH, we achieved mean absolute error of 2.87, compared to 3.27 reported in [16]. On Adience, we
achieved 56.01% exact accuracy compared to 50.70% reported in [13].
4 ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS
Ground Truth Age
H
um
an
 E
st
im
at
ed
 A
ge
(a) (b)
Age Difference
P(
A
 y
ou
ng
er
 th
an
 B
)
Figure 2: Results of the user study: (a) Test I – volunteers were asked to guess the actual age
given an image. (b) Test II – volunteers were asked to compare the age of two persons.
observation is that human’s performance on age comparisons can be approximated by a
logistic function, as exhibited by the curve depicted in Fig. 2(b).
2.2 From Age Comparisons to Age Posterior
We learn from the user study presented in Sec. 2.1 that each pair of age comparison can be
approximated by a logistic function. Specifically, we treat each comparison between a query
face I and a reference face Iref of known age k as a random event denoted as Ck ? {0,1},
where Ck = 1 indicates I is older than Iref. The likelihood of event Ck given that face I has an
age a is denoted P(Ck|a),
P(Ck|a) =
{
?(? (a? k))/Z if Ck = 1
?(? (k?a))/Z if Ck = 0
, (1)
where ?(·) is a logistic function with ?(x) = 1/(1+ exp(?x)), Z is a partition function
with Z = P(Ck = 0|a)+P(Ck = 1|a). The parameter ? is a value that can be obtained by
fitting the curve generated from our user study (Fig. 2(b)). We use ? = 0.36 throughout
our experiments. Figure 3 depicts a few examples that show the likelihood P(Ck|a) derived
from age comparisons across with different reference images. Let’s denote the events of M
comparisons as Ck1 ,Ck2 , . . . ,CkM , we can compute the age posterior probability as
P(a|{Ckm}) ? P(a)?Mm=1 P(Ckm |a), (2)
where P(a) is the prior of age, which we assume to be uniform in this study. An example
of posterior distribution is shown in Fig. 3. It is worth pointing out that a narrower posterior
distribution can be obtained if more comparisons are conducted.
Discussion: One may expect different logistic curves for different age ranges, since the
difficulty level may increase from comparing younger ages to older ages. In this paper, we
simplified the assumption on the logistic function by using a single ? , but with satisfactory
results. Future work can explore different logistic functions across ages.
2.3 MegaAge Dataset
In this section we detail the construction of the MegaAge dataset with posterior distribution
serving as the target label of each image. We randomly sampled query images from the chal-
lenging MegaFace dataset [12]3 (which contains a million unconstrained photos that capture
more than 690K different individuals) and YFCC100M dataset [15]. We adopted the widely
3http://megaface.cs.washington.edu/
ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS 5
× × ×? ×
Query face, ?
? is older than ????1
?(?|{?./}) ?(?.2|?) ?(?.3|?) ?(?.4|?) ?(?.5|?)
Reference face, ????1 Reference face, ????2 Reference face, ????5 Reference face, ????6
? is older than ????2 ? is younger than ????5 ? is younger than ????6
? ? 	×
Figure 3: An illustration to show the age posterior distribution P(a|{Ckm}) as a product of a
prior P(a) and all likelihoods P(Ckm |a).
Outlier
Figure 4: Examples of images in the proposed MegaAge dataset and the associated age
posterior label. Each blue vertical line represents a comparison (between the query face and
a reference face) and its direction of supporting the posterior. The last figure shows an outlier
that arises due to disagreement of annotators.
used FG-NET as our reference database. The labelling process takes the same procedures as
illustrated in Fig. 3. Specifically, given a query image sampled from MegaFace/YFCC100M,
we compared it with six face images selected from the reference database. We introduced a
few constraints in the selection process to ensure meaningful comparisons. Firstly, the ref-
erence images need to have the same gender as the query image so as to avoid gender bias.
An accurate gender classifier with an accuracy rate of over 97% was used. Secondly, we
roughly estimated the age of the query image using an existing model trained on MORPH
and selected three images smaller than the estimated age and another three that are larger
than the estimated age. Selection is random apart from the constraints. Age posterior was
generated following the method presented in Sec. 2.2. We repeated this process to label all
query images with posterior. Outliers with a posterior distribution with 90% confidence in-
terval larger than 15 years old were discarded. This kind of outliers constituted only 3% of
queries. More than 80% of queries have their posterior’s confidence interval less than 8 years
old. The final number of images we collected with posterior ground-truth is 41,941. Note
that actual age ground-truth can be easily derived from the posterior by taking the mode of
the distribution. Some of the samples are shown in Fig. 4.
6 ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS
Age Distribution
FC
Layer
Hyperplane Response
70
Softmax
Layer
A_gt
Cost Sensitive 
Loss
KL
Loss
Sigmoid Layer
Feature
CNNInput
P_gt(a)
FC
Layer
Output
128
Age Posterior 
Distribution, 
KL 
Divergence 
Loss, LKL
Pgt(a)
agt
Actual Age 
Ground-Truth, Age Posterior Ground-Truth, 
Cost Sensitive 
Loss, Lhyper
Ordinal 
Classification
P (a|I)
Input, I
Figure 5: The proposed network can be trained end-to-end. It is supervised by two signals:
cost sensitive loss and KL divergence loss. The formal is used to regularise the ordinal
hyperplane module. The latter provides further constraints to ensure the estimated age to fall
within the desired age distribution.
3 Deep Learning from Age Posterior
We now describe the deep convolutional network that learns from age posterior. Figure 5
illustrates the proposed network. The network comprises a truncated VGG CNN network
for extracting 128-dimensional features from a given image. Further details on this CNN is
given in Sec. 4. Apart from the feature extraction layer, the network consists of an ordinal
hyperplane module and an age posterior distribution module. The network is jointly trained
with cost sensitive loss and KL divergence loss. We detail the modules as follows.
3.1 Ordinal Hyperplane Module
Ordinal hyperplane method [1, 23] has been shown very powerful in capturing ordinal in-
formation of age labels. To gain advantage from this nice characteristic, we formulate an
ordinal hyperplane module in our network. The module can be trained with cost sensitive
loss, and the gradient can be back-propagated to further update the parameters of the feature
extraction CNN. It is noted that our network can be trained without using the cost sensitive
loss (using KL divergence loss alone), but we observed better performance when the network
is trained with the loss as a regulariser.
Design: The module comprises of a fully-connected (FC) layer, an output layer, and a sig-
moid layer, as illustrated in Fig. 5. The output layer treats the age labels yi as a rank order,
yi ? {1, . . . ,K}, where K is the number of labels (typically set as 70 in our approach). The
FC layer basically learns K classification function fk(x), to model the confidence of “face’s
age is larger than k”, that is fk(I) =< wk,?(I) >, where ?(I) is the feature of a face im-
age, and wk is the linear weight of the classifier encapsulated in the FC. The sigmoid layer
converts the ordinal classifications to responses as an input for the subsequent age posterior
distribution module, which is described next in Sec. 3.2.
Loss: We follow [1, 23] to use cost sensitive loss as an auxiliary loss to regularise our
network. The cost sensitive loss is a relaxed regression loss, which can be written as
Lhyper = ?k Costk(agt)? fk(I)?1[agt > k]?22, (3)
where agt is the ground-truth age, 1[·] is an indicator function, which equals 1 for true
argument, and 0 otherwise. Here Costk(agt) is a truncated cost [1] which equals 0 when
|agt ? k|< L. Here we set L as 3.
ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS 7
3.2 Age Posterior Distribution Module
Note that the ordinal hyperplane module only captures the ordinal information of age labels
but falls short of representing the uncertainty of an estimated range of ages. Here we show
that it is possible to extend the ordinal hyperplane module to a probabilistic one.
Design: Recall that we learn classifiers fk(I) in the ordinal hyperplane module. The response
of a k-th classifier can be treated as the probability of a random event Ek ? {0,1}, where
Ek = 1 when the classifier thinks that a face is older than age k, that is fk(I) = P(Ek = 1|I) =
?(wTk ?(I)), where wk is a learnable weight and ?(I) is the deep convolutional feature. Next,
we assume all K classifiers are independent, and estimate the age posterior given all {Ek}Kk=1,
P(a|I) = P(a|{Ek}) =
1
Z
P(a)?Kk=1 P(Ek|a)
=
1
Z
P(a)?Kk=1 P(Ek = 1|a) fk(I)P(Ek = 0|a)(1? fk(I)).
(4)
Notice here we approximate P(Ek|a) as an exponential combination P(Ek = 1|a) fk(I) · P(Ek =
0|a)(1? fk(I)) instead of linear one fk(I)P(Ek = 1|a) +(1? fk(I))P(Ek = 0|a). If we take log
on both sides of Eq. (4), the equation turns to
logP(a|I) =? logZ + logP(a)+?k ( fk(I) logP(Ek = 1|a)+(1? fk(I)) logP(Ek = 0|a)) .
(5)
Similar to the assumption we made in Sec. 2.2, we assume that a likelihood can be modelled
as a logistic function, e.g., P(Ek = 1|a) = ?(? (k? a)), which only depends on the age
difference. Here we use the same ? coefficient as in Sec 2.2. Note that the posterior
logP(a|I) is just a linear function of ordinal hyperplane classifier fk(I), which means we can
conveniently compute P(a|I) by linking a fully connected layer after the ordinal hyperplane
module, and followed by a SoftMax layer for normalisation. This design is parameter free
and easy to implement.
Loss: We can train the network end-to-end using the ground-truth age posterior distribution,
denoted as Pgt(a). We employ KL-divergence between two distribution as our loss,
LKL = DKL(Pgt(a)||P(a|I)) =??a Pgt(a) logP(a|I)?Const. (6)
Here P(a|I) is the soft output of our network. There are three possible ways to prepare for
Pgt(a): (1) for dataset that is labelled only with actual age, e.g., MORPH, we set Pgt as a
sharp Gaussian distribution with ? = 2. (2) For category based dataset, e.g., Adience, the
confidence interval of each distribution of each sample is equivalent to the age range each
specific age category covers. (3) for MegaAge dataset, we use the ground-truth age posterior.
4 Experiments
Datasets: We evaluate our method on MORPH2 [18], Adience [3] and MegaAge.
1) MORPH2 contains more than 55,000 face images of 13,000 individuals aged from 16
to 77 years. On average, each individual has more than 3 images and exact age was given.
MORPH2 is the largest publicly available aging dataset. We follow the experimental set-
ting in [16], where the the data is randomly divided into 80%/20% exclusive training/test
partitions.
8 ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS
Table 1: We first train a deep model with the training partition of MORPH2 and Adience
(indicated by ‘0%’). We then gradually add MegaAge training samples to the initial training
pool to boost the model’s performance.
Percentage of MegaAge Added 0% 50% 100%
Adience (Exact) 53.43±3.83 53.92±4.78 54.52±3.74
Adience (1-off) 88.18±3.26 91.29±2.64 91.29±1.63
MegaAge (CA(3)) 39.70 52.27 63.09
MegaAge (CA(5)) 53.26 76.48 80.79
2) Adience provides 26,580 images, which cover an age range from 0 to 70. The samples
are divided into 8 age groups (0-2, 4-6, 8-13, 15-20, 25-32, 38-43, 48-53, 60-). We follow
the standard protocol [3] to perform a 5-fold cross validation.
3) MegaAge, as described in Sec. 2.3, contains 41,941 images encompassing ages from 0 to
70. We reserve 8,530 images as test data. Each sample was labelled with age posterior as
the ground-truth.
Evaluation Metric: The performance on MORPH2 is evaluated by mean average error
(MAE). As for Adience, we report the exact mean accuracy on 8-class classification. We
also provide the 1-off accuracy [3], i.e., a prediction is considered correct if it hits the exact
age group or its neighbouring groups. For MegaAge, we employ cumulative accuracy as our
metric, that is, CA(n) = Kn/K×100, where Kn is the number of test images whose absolute
estimated error is smaller than n. To align with the results of Adience, of which the range of
each age group is around 5, we report CA(3) and CA(5) in our experiments.
Network Architecture: In this study we use a truncated VGG-network, which only has one
forth of filter number in each convolutional layer of the original VGG network [21]. Thus
the computational cost is reduced to 1/16 of the original. Our network runs at 10 frames per
second (FPS) on a i7 desktop and 50 FPS on a GTX 970 GPU. We initialise all networks
with a face verification model trained on MS-Celeb-1M dataset [8], of which the result on
LFW [10] is 99.3%.
4.1 Evaluating The Quality of MegaAge Annotations
To show that the proposed annotation approach (Sec. 2.2) is capable of generating high-
quality ground-truth to boost the performance of existing models, we conduct an experiment
in which we gradually add more MegaAge data to the initial pool of training set. The initial
pool is formed by the training partition of MORPH2 and Adience. Here we use a variant of
the proposed network – we use the truncated VGG network and train it with cost sensitive
loss only. Prediction is made via ordinal classification and the aggregation rule presented
by [1]. We feed this network with increasing MegaFace training data from 0% to 100%.
To report results on Adience, the method first estimates the exact age and then assigns the
estimation to the nearest age group defined. It is evident from Table 1 that annotations of
MegaAge is of high quality ones and they can improve the deep learning based method with
a considerable margin.
4.2 Comparisons with Existing Methods and Ablation Study
Results on Adience and MegaAge. In this experiment we compared our method with state-
of-the-art methods [2, 3, 13] on both the Adience and MegaAge datasets. For the Cumulative
ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS 9
Table 2: A comparison with existing methods and ablation study. The Cumulative At-
tribute [2] method was re-trained with VGG face verification features.
Test Data Adience MegaAge
Metric Exact 1-off CA(3) CA(5)
Existing methods:
LBP+FPLBP+Dropout 0.8 [3] 45.10±2.60 79.50±1.40 – –
Deep CNN [13] 50.70±5.10 84.70±2.20 – –
Cumulative Attribute [2] 52.34±3.72 89.34±1.79 64.21 81.44
Proposed method and variants:
w/o Lhyper 49.46±5.51 82.99±3.74 59.44 77.19
w/o LKL 54.52±3.74 91.29±1.63 63.09 80.79
Full model 56.01±4.41 91.42±2.15 64.51 82.31
Attribute method [2], we retrained the method using VGG face verification features trained
on MS-Celeb-1M. For Deep CNN [13], we reported the results given in the original paper. In
addition to the aforementioned comparisons, we also evaluated the importance of different
losses used in the training of our network:
1) w/o LKL - we removed the KL divergence loss and used only the cost sensitive loss. In this
setting, the age estimation is given by aggregating the ordinal classifications of the ordinal
hyperplane module following [1]. Note that one will need actual age labels for using the cost
sensitive loss. To enable us for training our network with MegaAge, we used MAP estimate,
the mode of the ground-truth distribution, as an approximation to the actual age ground-truth.
2) w/o Lhyper - we discarded the cost sensitive loss and used only the KL-divergence loss.
3) Full model - our full method with both the LKL and Lhyper.
Results in Table 2 show that the performance of our network drops considerably with-
out either of the cost sensitive loss, LHyper, or the KL divergence loss, LKL, suggesting the
complementary nature and importance of these two losses. As shown earlier in Fig. 1(b),
the KL divergence loss actually helps the ordinal hyperplane module to produce smoother
classifications. The proposed full method outperforms state-of-the-art Deep CNN [13] and
Cumulative Attribute (re-trained with deep features) approaches [2]. Qualitative results on
Adience are depicted in Fig. 6.
Results on MORPH2. Here we provide additional results on MORPH2, despite the per-
formance on it were long saturated. We use the same setting following [19]. The following
baselines are tested: 1) DEX w/o IMDB-WIKI [19]: A VGG-16 Net pretrained on Ima-
geNet 2) DEX w/ IMDB-WIKI [19]: The same model as 1) but the ImageNet pre-trained
model is further pretrained on a large-scale age dataset, named as IMDB-WIKI, which con-
tains 523,051 images crawled from IMDb and Wikipedia. 3) Ours w/o IMDB-WIKI: our
full model with mixed loss, i.e., cost sensitive loss and KL divergence loss. The model is
pre-trained on a face verification task. 4) Ours w/ IMDB-WIKI: a VGG-16 network which
is the same as 2) but it employs the proposed mixed loss. The model was pre-trained on
IMDB-WIKI.
Table 3 summarises our result on MORPH2. With the additional supervision using the
age posterior distribution by KL-divergence loss, we reduced MAE on MORPH2 dataset by
0.16, when both DEX and our model are trained with IMDB-WIKI. The improvement is
significant considering that MORPH2 is a rather mature benchmark with saturated perfor-
mance.
10 ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS
Predicted Age
0-2
4-6
8-13
15-20
25-32
38-43
48-53
60-100
(a)
2.00.7 23.72.4
G1
G2
G3
G4
G5
G6
G7
G8
G1
11.7 66.8
G5
33.1
G6
41.931.5 48.86.1(b)
G3
3.6 11.3
xFigure 6: a) We illustrate the predictions of our full model on the Adience dataset. The
box plot shows the median, first/third quartiles, and min/max on actual age predictions, and
how they fall into different age groups defined by Adience. (b) Some qualitative results are
shown. Underscored images are failure cases (under the 1-off evaluation metric), which are
caused by heavy occlusion and wrong faces detected.
Table 3: Comparative results based on mean absolute error (MAE). Results are migrated
from [19]. The proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art performance on MORPH2 (*
indicates different data split).
Method MORPH2[18] Method MORPH2[18]
Human workers[9] 6.30 DIF[9] 3.80
AGES[4] 8.83 MTWGP[25] 6.28
CA-SVR[2] 5.88 SVR[7] 5.77
OHRank[1] 5.69 DLA[22] 4.77
Huerta et al. [11] 4.25? Guo et al. [5] 4.18?
Guo et al. [6] 3.92? Yi et al. [24] 3.63?
Rothe et al. [20] 3.45 Niu et al. [16] 3.27
DEX w/o IMDB-WIKI [19] 3.25 DEX w/ IMDB-WIKI [19] 2.68
Ours w/o IMDB-WIKI 2.87 Ours w/ IMDB-WIKI 2.52
5 Conclusion
We have presented a novel annotation scheme for facial age database. Instead of labelling
actual age or age range as practiced in existing studies, we label each face with age poste-
rior distribution to better capture the uncertainty and ordinal information of age labels. The
distribution can be conveniently and reliably obtained through a small number of compar-
isons between a query face with reference faces from another database. Experimental results
suggest the good quality of the annotations. It is noteworthy that the proposed annotation
scheme is not limited to facial age labelling, it is suitable for other subjective labelling tar-
gets, e.g., degree of continuous facial expression change. In this study, we also introduced a
way to train a deep network directly using age posterior ground-truths via the KL divergence
loss. The loss is found to be complementary with the commonly applied cost sensitive loss.
Acknowledgement: This work is supported by SenseTime Group Limited and the General
Research Fund sponsored by the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong SAR (CUHK
14224316).
ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS 11
References
[1] Kuang-Yu Chang, Chu-Song Chen, and Yi-Ping Hung. Ordinal hyperplanes ranker
with cost sensitivities for age estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 585–592, 2011.
[2] Ke Chen, Shaogang Gong, Tao Xiang, and Chen Change Loy. Cumulative attribute
space for age and crowd density estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 2467–2474, 2013.
[3] Eran Eidinger, Roee Enbar, and Tal Hassner. Age and gender estimation of unfiltered
faces. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security, 9(12):2170–2179,
2014.
[4] Xin Geng, Zhi-Hua Zhou, and Kate Smith-Miles. Automatic age estimation based on
facial aging patterns. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
29(12):2234–2240, 2007.
[5] Guodong Guo and Guowang Mu. Simultaneous dimensionality reduction and human
age estimation via kernel partial least squares regression. In IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 657–664, 2011.
[6] Guodong Guo and Guowang Mu. A framework for joint estimation of age, gender and
ethnicity on a large database. Image and Vision Computing, 32(10):761–770, 2014.
[7] Guodong Guo, Yun Fu, Charles R Dyer, and Thomas S Huang. Image-based human age
estimation by manifold learning and locally adjusted robust regression. IEEE Transac-
tions on Image Processing, 17(7):1178–1188, 2008.
[8] Yandong Guo, Lei Zhang, Yuxiao Hu, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng Gao. Ms-celeb-1m:
A dataset and benchmark for large-scale face recognition. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, 2016.
[9] Hu Han, Charles Otto, Xiaoming Liu, and Anil K Jain. Demographic estimation from
face images: Human vs. machine performance. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 37(6):1148–1161, 2015.
[10] Gary B Huang, Manu Ramesh, Tamara Berg, and Erik Learned-Miller. Labeled faces
in the wild: A database for studying face recognition in unconstrained environments.
Technical report, Technical Report 07-49, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, 2007.
[11] Ivan Huerta, Carles Fernández, and Andrea Prati. Facial age estimation through the fu-
sion of texture and local appearance descriptors. In European Conference on Computer
Vision Workshop, pages 667–681, 2014.
[12] Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, Steven M Seitz, Daniel Miller, and Evan Brossard. The
MegaFace benchmark: 1 million faces for recognition at scale. In IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
[13] Gil Levi and Tal Hassner. Age and gender classification using convolutional neural
networks. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshop,
2015.
12 ZHANG ET AL.: QUANTIFYING FACIAL AGE BY POSTERIOR OF AGE COMPARISONS
[14] Changsheng Li, Qingshan Liu, Jing Liu, and Hanqing Lu. Learning ordinal discrimina-
tive features for age estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2012.
[15] Karl Ni, Roger Pearce, Kofi Boakye, Brian Van Essen, Damian Borth, Barry Chen,
and Eric Wang. Large-scale deep learning on the yfcc100m dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1502.03409, 2015.
[16] Zhenxing Niu, Mo Zhou, Le Wang, Xinbo Gao, and Gang Hua. Ordinal regression
with multiple output CNN for age estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2016.
[17] Gabriel Panis and Andreas Lanitis. An overview of research activities in facial age
estimation using the FG-NET aging database. In European Conference on Computer
Vision, 2014.
[18] Karl Ricanek and Tamirat Tesafaye. MORPH: A longitudinal image database of normal
adult age-progression. In IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face & Gesture
Recognition, 2006.
[19] Rasmus Rothe, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Deep expectation of real and ap-
parent age from a single image without facial landmarks. International Journal of
Computer Vision, pages 1–14, 2016.
[20] Rasmus Rothe, Radu Timofte, and Luc Van Gool. Some like it hot-visual guidance for
preference prediction. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 5553–5561, 2016.
[21] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-
scale image recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556, 2014.
[22] Xiaolong Wang, Rui Guo, and Chandra Kambhamettu. Deeply-learned feature for age
estimation. In IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pages
534–541, 2015.
[23] Huei-Fang Yang, Bo-Yao Lin, Kuang-Yu Chang, and Chu-Song Chen. Automatic age
estimation from face images via deep ranking. In British Machine Vision Conference,
2013.
[24] Dong Yi, Zhen Lei, and Stan Z Li. Age estimation by multi-scale convolutional net-
work. In Asian Conference on Computer Vision, pages 144–158, 2014.
[25] Yu Zhang and Dit-Yan Yeung. Multi-task warped gaussian process for personalized age
estimation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
2622–2629, 2010.
