1
Gaussian Filter in CRF Based
Semantic Segmentation
Yichi Gu1,2, Qisheng Wu1, Jing Li1, Kai Cheng1
Abstract
Artificial intelligence is making great changes in academy and industry with the
fast development of deep learning, which is a branch of machine learning and
statistical learning. Fully convolutional network [1] is the standard model for semantic
segmentation. Conditional random fields coded as CNN [2] or RNN [3] and
connected with FCN has been successfully applied in object detection [4]. In this
paper, we introduce a multi-resolution neural network for FCN and apply Gaussian
filter to the extended CRF kernel neighborhood and the label image to reduce the
oscillating effect of CRF neural network segmentation, thus achieve higher precision
and faster training speed.
1. Introduction
Traditional machine learning algorithms and deep learning algorithms are two
important methods for segmentation. Traditional algorithm extracts the object features
by statistics, transformations, geometry etc., while deep learning algorithms
automatically extract features by filters and deformations. A lot of deep learning
neural networks are developed, e.g. deep Boltzmann network [11], deep belief
network [12], deep convolutional network [16] etc. Several neural networks are
combined, e.g. Auto Encoder [14], FasterRCNN [6], GAN [13] etc. The fusion of
different kinds of neural networks better examine local and global, dominant and
recessive properties with faster speed and higher accuracy.
In semantic segmentation, the network is optimized according to the label image
with the segmentation information by assigning each pixel a class label. Fully
convolutional neural network [1] was invested for semantic segmentation. It contains
two parts: convolutional neural network (CNN) and the corresponding
deconvolutional neural network (DCNN) to extract features and reconstruct image.
Convolutional neural networks, such as VGG [15], Inception [6], Resnet [7], YoloII
[5] win the first places in imaging competition. For three dimensional object detection,
we adopt the multi-resolution structure and combinations of two dimensional filters in
the convolutional neural network. Although CNN is a multi-resolution framework by
sampling operation, branches with different length kernels are combined to strengthen
the power of system.
CRF is a statistical model of maximum a posteriori with Gibbs distribution.
Several methods are explored to solve CRF, e.g. independent conditional model,
expectation maximization algorithm, mean field method, etc. By mean field
approximation, the iterated solution can be represented by CNN, transferred to RNN
and solved by network optimization. In this paper, we apply Gaussian filters to extend
kernel function and the label image to reduce the noise caused by sharp edges with
large gradient in the discrete data.
We will describe the FCN and CRF in session 2 followed by the adaption of
Gaussian Filter in session 3. Experiments on CRF network for lung nodule
segmentation are discussed in session 4 and conclusions will be drawn in session 5.
1TQ Medical Tech. Co. 2Contact Info.: yichig@163.com
2
2. Deep Learning Neural Network
2.1 Artificial Neural Network
ANN is a mathematical model of network approximation system inspired by the
biological neural networks. It establishes and optimizes multi-layered or self-adjusted
functions for detection, classification, segmentation etc.. A typical ANN is
characterized by three points: (1) architecture specifies variables and topological
relations of the network, such as component or transform weights, they level the
strength of the passing signal; (2) activation function defines the message transform
term to filter, re-scale and normalize the signal; (3) learning rule formulates the tuning
operation of weights along the time. Neural networks have been used on a variety of
tasks, including computer vision, speech recognition, social network filtering, playing
games, medical diagnosis and in many other domains.
2.2 Convolution Neural Network
Convolutional neural network is a class of deep, feed-forward artificial neural
network which has been successfully applied in the systems of image analysis and
natural language processing.
CNN is characterized by the properties of local connection, weight sharing and
down-sampling layers. Local connection and weight sharing reduce the quantity of
parameter remarkably, so that the training complexity is decreased and the over-fitting
problem is alleviated. Down-sampling also decreases the amount of parameters and
predictions, and makes the network adapt to deformation which improves the
generality of the network. CNN is an end to end filtration bank of convolutions,
sampling, deformations, activations, normalizations etc.. The structure and component
of CNN vary for different applications.
2.3 Inception and Resnet
Since the breakthrough of AlexNet, CNN is armed with deeper networks and
wider layers which cause problems of computational complexity and gradient
dispersion. In order to solve those problems, Google proposed a series of Inception-
Resnet networks [7, 19, 20, 21] for image recognition. In the convolution layers,
kernels of length (1,7) are applied; square convolution is factorized by directional
convolutions; crosscut connections between layers are added. These improvements
accelerate network calculation and increase the system’s non-linearity. Inception-
Resnet makes outstanding performance with large computation. Specified models are
utilized in practice.
2.4 Fully Connected Neural Network
FCN was introduced in [1] for semantic segmentation. It connects CNN with
deconvolutional network. The DCNN is composed of deconvolution operations and
unpooling operations which precise the segmentation [8]. The convolution and
deconvolution layers are fused together by adding to reuse the features while U-Net [9]
concatenate the layers to segment the bio-medical image. The deconvolution network
performs the super-resolution function and the whole network is concise and efficient.
Their success in semantic segmentation shows the advantage of cross-layer fusion
which is also applied in Resnet, Densely connected network etc..
2.5 Conditional Random Fields
For object detection, the plane or cubic convolution kernels may not be enough to
extract the special object feature. CRF considers both pixel wise energy and the
3
neighborhood energy which compensates for convolution. Following [2,3], we have
the CRF as RNN framework.
Let (I, L) denote the pair of image and label and the conditional probability P(L|I)
is modeled with Gibbs distribution of the form P(L=x|I)= exp(-E(x|I))/Z(I) where
E(x|I) is the combination of unary energy and pairwise potentials as weighted
Gaussians. Maximization of the conditional probability is equivalent to minimize
energy E(x|I). By mean-field approximation, P(L=x|I)= Q(x)? ?iQi(xi). The
convolution network as the kernel of RNN is as follows.
(1) Initialization: for all i
(2) Kernel operation:
?
(3) Weighted filter operation:
(4) Compatibility transform:
(5) Add unary potential:
(6) Softmax normalization, while not determinate go to step (2).
In the above, Ui(l) is the unary energy, k(fi, fj) is the kernel function where fi and
fj are binary neighbors, w(1),w(2) are the coefficients of appearance and smooth kernels,
?(l,l’) are compatibility coefficients. After choosing appropriate parameters of kernels
and initial values, the CNN optimizes the kernel coefficients and compatibility
coefficients.
2.6 Combination of FCN and CRF
The semantic segmentation network FCN is connected with CRF by fully
connection. The whole network actually outputs two predictions and the loss function
is set to be the linear combination of the cross entropy of each prediction and the
coefficient tunes the gradient scale on the parameter increment so that the system
converges smoothly.
By considering the advantages of CNNs, we adopt the following model. Fig.1
shows the whole structure of the net which is composed of multi-blocks and dropout
layer. Each multi-block is the concatenate combination of convolutions denoted in
box and average pooling in diamond. The first four multi-blocks apply plane kernels
while the last two multi-blocks use cubic kernels. Kernels of size 1-7 appear in all
multi-blocks simultaneously. For different layers, the plane kernels are selected in
different directions. For three dimensional images, plane kernel decomposition
computes faster than cubic kernel and works better than the linear kernel
decomposition.
4
Fig. 1
5
Fig. 2
Fig. 3
6
Fig. 4
Fig. 5
3. Function of Gaussian Filter
3.1 Convolution and Filters
The convolution of two signals is the sliding sums of their multiplications. In
frequency domain, its spectrum is the multiplication of the signals’ spectra. The
convolution in solid space is corresponded to the filtration in frequency space and the
7
kernel signal acts as filter. Convolution has wide applications: linear time-invariant
system representation, noisy system representation, edge extraction, smooth transform
etc.. which computes linearly but adjusts the frequency spectrum. Convolution and
deconvolution are a pair of important operations dealing with various problems in
physics and engineering.
3.2 Gaussian Filter
Gaussian filter is expressed as the normal distribution which is the limiting
distribution of the normalized sum of iid random variables. It is characterized by the
center and variance. Due to the large quantity of similar individuals, a variety
variables can be approximated by Gaussian variable or Gaussian process, such as
noise, heat, quantum etc.. Gaussian filter has the highest value in the center and
FWHM proportional to the standard deviation, decreasing rapidly in the area three
times of standard deviation away from the center. With these properties, Gaussian
filter is used as low pass filter for smoothing or denoising.
3.3 Applications of Gaussian Filter in Semantic Segmentation and CRF
In the network for semantic segmentation, loss function is the cross entropy of the
resulting predictions and the label image. Label image is piece wise constant in
different areas while the output prediction is a probabilistic image. The Gaussian
smoothing on the label image reduces the absolute error and gradient on object
boundary to enhance the precision.
In the CRF as CNN framework, Gaussian distribution is extended on the kernel,
g(|fi-fj|)k(fi, fj) where g is the truncated weight function. The original six-neighborhood
kernel function is extended and smoothed. Faster convergence is obtained since the
scaled and fully connected neighborhood is applied. Variant extensions of CRF can be
found in [17,18].
4. Experiments on Lung Nodule Detection
Our algorithm is implemented for lung nodule segmentation. The average speed
is approximately 0.55s/step for Inception network and 1.2s/step for CRF using an
Intel Xeon E5-1620 v3 CPU with 3.50GHz and a single NVIDIA GeForce GTX
1080Ti GPU. The proposed algorithm is tested on standard data set from Competition
of Lung Nodule Analysis 2016 (LUNA16).
4.1 Gaussian Kernel Function
As described in [2], the pairwise edge potentials of our CRF models are defined
by a linear combination of Gaussian kernels in feature space. We extend and re-scale
the Gaussian kernel by evaluating the Gaussian kernel function on enlarged
neighborhoods as below. Fig. 6 shows three modes of neighborhood: six
neighborhoods, eighteen neighborhoods and twenty-six neighborhoods. We choose
eighteen neighborhoods to construct binary energy function. Further more, scaled
weights are distributed to different neighborhoods, such as one for six neighborhoods
points and ? for other twelve neighborhood points.
8
Fig. 6 different neighborhoods of 3D space
Three experiments are conducted under the same parameters: 10000 iterations of
FCN network, 5000 iterations of FCN network plus additional 5000 iterations with six
neighborhoods of CRF and 5000 iterations of FCN network plus additional 5000
iterations with eighteen neighborhoods of CRF.
Loss Pos. Prec. (%) Neg. Prec. (%)
FCN(10000 steps) 0.5530 72.8821 93.2632
FCN(5000 steps)
+ 6-CRF(5000 steps) 0.5428 72.5146 95.4866
FCN(5000 steps)
+ 18-CRF(5000 steps) 0.5250 77.5542 98.1018
Table 1
Fig. 7 Precision of FCN, six neighborhoods kernel and eighteen neighborhoods
kernel
Table 1 compares the tests of three networks on the same data of LUNA16. Fig. 7
shows the precision of different neighborhoods. We obtain the following results: (1)
with the same parameters and the same iterations, FCN network with CRF works
better than FCN network according to the positive and negative precision; (2) CRF
with eighteen neighborhoods kernel Gaussian function performs better than six
neighborhoods kernel. This experiment shows the accuracy improvement of the CRF
with extended Gaussian kernel in deep learning model.
4.2 Gaussian Filtered Labels
9
In semantic segmentation, the label image is a binary image, in which one
represents nodule area and zero otherwise. Because of the sharp edges of nodule,
ringing problem may be caused. Many methods can eliminate ringing effect, such as
averaging, regularization, multi-filtration etc.. We apply the Gaussian filter to the
label image and obtain a mask image which keeps value one on nodules, blurs on the
edge and is zero otherwise.
Specifically, we apply the mask image on the computation of loss function by
computing the cross entropy of prediction and the mask image, then multiplies the
weighted label image. Table 2 compares the results of Gaussian filtered loss function
and the original one. Fig. 8 shows the precision of different loss functions. According
to the results of this table, Gaussian filter has little influence on the convolution-FCN
network but shows changes on CRF network. Generally, the network can achieve
better performance after filtering, which proves that Gaussian smoothing alleviates
the oscillating effect caused by high frequency components in the label image.
The weighted label image is to be chosen in different situations. In lung nodule
detection, it can be the weighted characteristic function of nodules. For further false
positive reduction, it is set to be the weighted characteristic function of nodule and
falsely classified nodule pixels.
FCN(5000 iterations) FCN + 18-CRF(5000 iterations)
Loss Pos. Prec.(%)
Neg. Prec.
(%) Loss
Pos. Prec.
(%)
Neg. Prec.
(%)
Original objective
function 0.66 59.94 95.28 0.60 63.12 94.91
Filtered objective
function 0.66 52.46 95.28 0.58 62.18 98.41
Table 2
Fig. 8 Precision of Gaussian filtered Loss Function vs. Regular Loss Function
4.3 Training Method
For lung nodule detection project, we adopt the network described in session 2.6
in which a five-layer multi-CNN is used to construct FCN followed by CRF. In
10
training stage, we use ADAM optimizer and 0.85 as keeping probability in dropout
layer. As to network parameters, such as learning rate, the CRF weight and
regularization parameters, they are all piece-wise constant along the iterations. As in
FasterRCNN [10], FCN and CRF are iterated alternatively to improve the
convergence of the system. Fig. 9 shows the contour of the detected nodules.
Fig. 9 Green: Detected Lung Nodule vs. Red: Ground Truth
5. Conclusions
From the above description and experiments, we conclude that the Gaussian filter
on the extended CRF kernel function and the label image for semantic segmentation
provides better precision. We also introduce a multi-box CNN model for imaging
which decomposes cubic convolution to plane convolutions and combines kernels of
different length in the same layer. These modifications work together with
regularization, batch normalization, data augmentations to optimize the neural
network system. Network parameters are also important to fine tune all these factors
to achieve the best result.
Reference
[1] Fully Convolutional Networks for Semantic Segmentation, Jonathan Long etc.,
CVPR2015, arXiv: 1411.4038
[2] Efficient Inference in Fully Connected CRFs with Gaussian Edge Potentials,
Philipp Kr ahenb uhl etc., Oct. 2012, arXiv: 1210.5644
[3] Conditional Random Fields as Recurrent Neural Networks, Shuai Zheng etc.,
April 2016, arXiv: 1502.03240
[4] Efficient multi-scale 3D CNN with fully connected CRF for accurate brain lesion
segmentation, Konstantinos Kamnitsas etc., Medical Image Analysis, 2017, 36(61-78)
[5] YOLO9000: Better, Faster, Stronger, Joseph Redmon etc. arXiv: 1612.08242v1,
Dec. 2016
[6] Rethinking the Inception architecture for computer vision, Christian Sregedy etc.
arXiv:1512.00567v3, Dec. 2015
[7] Inception-v4, Inception-ResNet and the Impact of Residual Connections on
Learning, Christian Sregedy etc. Aug. 2016, arXiv: 1602.07261v2
[8] Learning Deconvolution Network for Semantic Segmentation, Hyeonwoo Noh
etc., May 2015, arXiv: 1505.0436
[9] U-Net: Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation, Olaf
Ronneberger etc., MICCAI 2015, arXiv: 1505.04597
11
[10] Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal
Networks. Shaoqing Ren etc. arXiv: 1506.01497v3, Jan. 2016
[11] Reducing the Dimensionality of data with Neural Networks, G. E. Hinton, 28
July 2006, VOL 313 Science
[12] Introduction to Deep Learning and Case Study, Y. Li, 2017
[13] Unsupervised representation learning with Deep Convolutional Generative
Adversarial Networks, Alec Radford etc., arXiv: 1511.06434, 2016
[14] Learning internal representations by error propagation. D E Rumellhart, G E
Hinton? R J Williams. Proc. PDP, 1986: 318-362.
[15] Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition, K.
Simonyan etc. arXiv: 1409.1556
[16] Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition, Y. LeCun etc., Proc.
IEEE, 1998, 86(11): 2278-2324
[17] Image semantic segmentation based on higher-order CRF model, L. Mao
etc..Application Research of Computers, Nov. 2013, Vol. 30 No. 11
[18] Super pixel-based conditional random field for image classification, W. Zhang
etc., Journal of Computer Applications, 2012, 32(5),1272-1275
[19] Rethinking the Inception Architecture for Computer Vision, C. Szegedy etc., Dec.
2015, http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.00567
[20] Going Deeper with Convolutions, C. Szegedy etc., Sep. 2014,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1409.4842
[21] Batch Normalization: Accelerating Deep Network Training by Reducing Internal
Covariate Shift, c. Szegedy etc., Mar. 2015, http://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167
