 
 
Abstract 
 
With crimes on the rise all around the world, video 
surveillance is becoming more important day by day. Due 
to the lack of human resources to monitor this increasing 
number of cameras manually, new computer vision 
algorithms to perform lower and higher level tasks are 
being developed. We have developed a new method 
incorporating the most acclaimed Histograms of Oriented 
Gradients, the theory of Visual Saliency and the saliency 
prediction model Deep Multi-Level Network to detect 
human beings in video sequences. Furthermore, we 
implemented the k – Means algorithm to cluster the HOG 
feature vectors of the positively detected windows and 
determined the path followed by a person in the video. We 
achieved a detection precision of 83.11% and a recall of 
41.27% in a time as short as 23.0047 seconds. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Computer Vision is day by day becoming important and 
with that human detection for applications like video 
surveillance, autonomous driving vehicles, person 
recognition have also become important. Human Detection 
is challenging because everyone is different in appearances 
and there are wide range of poses. There should be a 
robust method for feature extraction even when the 
background is cluttered. The cameras used for these 
applications make use of RGB cameras during night when 
there is deficiency of light and the images are not clear. 
This makes the changes in lighting conditions an important 
point as well. For this, many researchers have proposed 
different methods for detecting humans from any image. 
Different methods for extraction of features have been 
developed so that the features can be applied to SVM for 
classification. One of the proposed methods is Histogram 
of Oriented Gradients [2], which is extensively used in 
detection of human beings.  
 
Visual Saliency is computed using various different 
methods after years of research on the field of cognitive 
science. It is still an open problem with the MIT Saliency 
Benchmark [7] getting newer and accurate models as time 
passes. Visual Saliency is basically an intensity map where 
higher intensities signify regions where a general human 
being would look and lower intensities mean decreasing 
level of visual attention. It is a measure of visual attention 
of humans on the basis of the content of the image. Here, 
we have used visual saliency for the purpose of region 
proposal. We used the Deep Multi-Level Network [1] 
developed for the same purpose. It has a encoder-decoder 
architecture which computes saliency maps as outputs. 
 
We used the HOG features to train a Support Vector 
Machine classifier [11] for detecting human beings in any 
frame. For this we used the OSU Color-Thermal dataset 
from the Ohio State University [4]. Further, we used the 
salience-windowed images for classification after training. 
With this, we got reduced computational time. This makes 
the process lot faster. But this isn't enough. The motion 
pattern of the human beings in the frame is equally 
important and we have addressed that problem as well. 
 
The k - Means algorithm [5] is an algorithm used to 
determine clusters of various data-points in the given data. 
Clustering can come in handy when we need to put similar 
things together in a same class. Data-points which are 
closer to each other on the data-space are considered to be 
in the same cluster. Using the k - means algorithm enabled 
us to find the movement patterns of the humans in the 
frame. This is important for person re-identification which 
is in itself another active research problem. We used the k 
– means algorithm to compare and cluster HOG features 
from consecutive frames so as to identify the set of points 
on the image resembling a particular person moving in the 
video. 
 
2. Related Work 
 
Various methods have been used time and again for 
human detection and tracking in videos. These methods 
 
Human Detection and Tracking for Video Surveillance: A Cognitive Science 
Approach 
 
Vandit Gajjar 
L. D. College of Engineering 
Ahmedabad 
gajjar.vandit.381@ldce.ac.in 
 
Ayesha Gurnani 
L. D. College of Engineering 
Ahmedabad 
gurnani.ayesha.52@ldce.ac.in 
Yash Khandhediya 
L. D. College of Engineering 
Ahmedabad 
khandhediya.yash.364@ldce.ac.in 
 
 
 
include the most acclaimed Histogram of Oriented 
Gradients as feature extractor [2]. Other than that, there 
are many different works which developed novel 
approaches within the scope of HOG [3, 16]. Few other 
methods have also been developed which use probabilistic 
assembly of robust part detectors [8], classification on 
riemannian manifolds [12], depth information [13], 
flexible mixture of parts [14], etc. 
Newer and better deep learning models have also been 
developed [10, 15]. The scope of this paper is limited to 
developing further on the HOG [2]. 
3. The Dataset 
 
We used the OSU Color-Thermal Pedestrian Dataset 
[4] from the Ohio State University. It is a dataset collected 
on campus of the university. It includes mainly the 
campus interaction of people from a birds-eye view which 
is basically what we want. All video surveillance cameras 
are placed in such a way that no person can reach to them. 
Therefore, they are kept at a larger height. The images are 
of size 320x240 pixels amounting to a total of 17089 
images. It was collected at three different locations on the 
campus of OSU thereby including variation in scene as 
well. Each image was captured periodically with a time 
period of 1/30 seconds. The dataset also includes Thermal 
images but we have only used the RGB images for this 
research. 
 
4. Human Detection using HOG features 
 
We firstly emulated the results achieved by [2] for 
comparison purpose. We trained the Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) classifier [11] as a two class classifier on 
the dataset by giving cropped human images as positive 
samples and random images of the same size as negative 
samples. The classification accuracy on the training 
dataset was found to be very high in the order of 98.32%. 
We tested the SVM classifier on other unseen images 
of the dataset. To detect humans from the whole image, 
the basic algorithm assumes a window of a particular size. 
Windows of this size are cropped out from the image one 
by one in a convolutional manner and HOG features are 
computed as shown in Figure 1. As the size of the image 
increases, total number of windows to be classified 
increases and due to extraneous data, the computational 
time to compute HOG features as well as for classification 
increases as well. The computation time taken was 
1768.29 seconds for a single image in the best case. This 
method is hence not viable for real-time applications. 
 
 
Regardless, we evaluated the results of the 
classification and found that the many false positive 
 
 
Figure 1: Block diagram for Human Detection in Normal Images using HOG Features 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Sample Images from the Dataset 
 
existed in the inferences of the classifier. This was due to 
vaguely similar HOG features of some parts in the 
background with the HOG features of a general human 
being. The recall was computed to be 0.93 which is very 
high. A proper model for human detection in surveillance 
videos required a perfect blend of precision as well as 
recall. Therefore, we did a bit of research to find new 
region proposal algorithms which would be helpful in 
reducing the recall as well as the computation time. 
 
5. The Saliency Model 
 
We used the Deep Multi-Layer Network for saliency 
prediction [1]. It is called the ML – Net. The purpose of 
using a Visual Saliency model was to propose possible 
regions where humans might be in the frame. Visual 
Saliency maps would indicate higher intensity where there 
are humans in the image because of results supported by 
[6]. An example of the salience-windowed image is given 
in Figure 3. 
 
 
The Deep Multi-Layer Network described in [1] 
outperforms all other models on the SALICON Dataset 
and also performs better on the MIT Saliency Benchmark 
[7]. This model is sufficient for our use i.e. human 
detection for video surveillance. 
 
6. Experiments 
 
We did various different experiments using the visual 
saliency maps for region proposal [9]. Firstly, we tried to 
make a bounding box out of salient regions in the saliency 
maps. This method was not successful because of the 
fading out of salient regions through the borders. 
We ended up multiplying the saliency maps with the 
images making the images salience-windowed. An 
example of the salience-windowed image is given in 
Figure 3. This gave us the reduced data that we were 
looking for to reduce the computation time as well as the 
recall. The comparison of results of classification on 
simple images and salience-windowed images is given in 
Table 1. 
 
 
 Excellent performance was observed on the salience-
windowed images as compared to the previous 
experimentation on normal images. Visual Saliency as a 
region proposal algorithm works great for human 
detection using HOG features. The complete block 
diagram of the method can be seen in Figure 4. 
 
 
7. Post Recording Tracking 
 
Tracking of human beings is important as well when it 
comes to detecting humans. Addressing this problem 
solves many woes of the security team. We have used the 
k – Means Clustering algorithm [5] to track particular 
humans in the frame and also get to know their walking 
path. 
We first record the location of each person in the frame 
 
 
Figure 4: Block Diagram of Salience-windowed Image 
Parameters Normal 
Images 
Salience-
windowed Images 
Execution Time 
(in seconds) 
1768.29 23.0047 
Precision 12.36% 83.11% 
Recall 93.12% 41.27% 
 
Table 1: Comparison of Results 
 
 
Figure 3: Example of Salience-windowed image 
 
for every successive frame. This is basically recording the 
location of every detected person on the frame. With this, 
we also recorded their particular HOG feature vectors 
associated with their location. Due to this, we call this 
method the post recording tracking. 
The maximum number of detected persons in any frame 
among the recorded data becomes the value of ‘k’ for 
tracking. We randomly initialize the algorithm 100 times 
and consider only the one which offers the least distance 
from the mean points of the recorded data. 
Each cluster of HOG features associate with location on 
frame represent the set of points on the path of a single 
person. We can then easily connect the points of each 
cluster thus giving us the path followed by each person in 
the frame. The block diagram of the method can be seen 
in Figure 5. 
Motion tracking hereby becomes possible due to 
implementation of the k – Means algorithm to determine 
clusters of feature points representing the path followed 
by a person. 
 
 
8. Conclusion 
 
We observed that detection and motion patterns of 
humans can be found out efficiently by using the proposed 
method in this paper. Using Visual Saliency as a region 
proposal algorithm proved to be beneficial for the 
research work. Human Detection improved by introducing 
the salience-windowed frames of the video to the HOG + 
SVM classifier [2]. The performance improved manifolds 
as compared to classification on normal images. This 
happened due to unnecessary data which was in a way 
increasing the recall of the model and also the 
computation time and thus making the model not fit to be 
used in real time. Using the Deep Multi-Layer Network 
for saliency prediction [1] to propose regions of interests 
makes the model much more feasible in terms of 
computational requirements as well as precision and 
recall. 
We also observed the usage of k – Means algorithm in 
clustering feature vectors of the same person and how it 
can be used to compute the path followed by a person in 
the video sequence. 
 
9. Future Work 
 
We are planning to incorporate motion tracking method 
Optical Flow in conjunction with Visual Saliency 
windowing to detect motion patterns of human beings for 
video surveillance. 
10. Acknowledgments 
We are thankful to the anonymous reviewers for their 
valuable comments due to which the paper was improved. 
We are also thankful to Prof. Usha Neelakantan, Head of 
Department, Electronics and Communication Engineering, 
Lalbhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering, Ahmedabad 
for her relentless support throughout the period of the 
project. 
References 
 
[1] M. Cornia, L. Baraldi, G. Serra and R. Cucchiara. A deep 
multi-level network for saliency prediction. In 23rd 
International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 
2016, pages 3488-3493. IEEE, 2016. 
[2] N. Dalal and B. Triggs. Histograms of oriented gradients 
for human detection. In (CVPR), 2005, pages 886-893. 
[3] N. Dalal, B. Triggs and C. Schmid. Human detection using 
oriented histograms of flow and appearance. In (ECCV), 
2006, pages 428-441. 
[4] J. W. Davis and V. Sharma. Background-subtraction using 
contour-based fusion of thermal and visible imagery. In 
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 106, no. 2 
(2007): 162-182. 
[5] J. A. Hartigan and M. A. Wong. Algorithm AS 136: A k-
means clustering algorithm. In Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics) 28, no. 1 
(1979): 100-108. 
[6] T. Judd, K. Ehinger, F. Durand and A. Torralba. Learning 
to predict where humans look. In (ICCV), 2009, pages 
2106-2113. 
[7] T. Judd, F. Durand, and A. Torralba. MIT saliency 
benchmark. 
http://people.csail.mit.edu/tjudd/SaliencyBenchmark/ 
[8] K. Mikolajczyk, C. Schmid and A. Zisserman. Human 
detection based on a probabilistic assembly of robust part 
detectors. In (ECCV), 2004, pages 69-82. 
 
Figure 5: Block Diagram of Post Recording Tracking 
 
[9] A. Oliva, A. Torralba, M. S. Castelhano and J. M. 
Henderson. Top-down control of visual attention in object 
detection. In Proc. of International conference on Image 
processing (ICIP), 2003, pages I-253. 
[10] W. Ouyang and X. Wang. Joint deep learning for 
pedestrian detection. In (ICCV), 2013, pages 2056-2063. 
[11] J. AK Suykens and J. Vandewalle. Least squares support 
vector machine classifiers. In Neural processing letters 9, 
no. 3 (1999): 293-300. 
[12] O. Tuzel, F. Porikli and P. Meer. Human detection via 
classification on riemannian manifolds. In (CVPR), 2007, 
pages 1-8. 
[13] L. Xia, C-C Chen and J. K. Aggarwal. Human detection 
using depth information by kinect. In (CVPRW), 2011, 
pages 15-22. 
[14] Y. Yang and D. Ramanan. Articulated human detection 
with flexible mixtures of parts. In IEEE Transactions on 
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 35, no. 12 
(2013): 2878-2890. 
[15] X. Zeng, W. Ouyang, and X. Wang. Multi-stage contextual 
deep learning for pedestrian detection. In (ICCV), 2013, 
pages 121-128. 
[16] Q. Zhu, M-C. Yeh, K-T. Cheng and S. Avidan. Fast human 
detection using a cascade of histograms of oriented 
gradients. In (CVPR), 2006, pages 1491-1498. 
