 
An Automated Compatibility Prediction Engine using DISC 
Theory Based Classification and Neural Networks 
 
Chandrasekaran Anirudh Bhardwaj 
VIT Chennai 
canirudh.bhardwaj2014@vit.ac.in 
 
Megha Mishra 
VIT Chennai 
megha.mishra2014@vit.ac.in 
 
Sweetlin Hemalatha 
VIT Chennai 
sweetlin.hemalatha@vit.ac.in 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Traditionally psychometric tests were used for profiling incoming workers. These methods use DISC profiling method 
to classify people into distinct personality types, which are further used to predict if a person may be a possible fit to 
the organizational culture. This concept is taken further by introducing a novel technique to predict if a particular pair 
of an incoming worker and the manager being assigned are compatible at a psychological scale. This is done using 
multilayer perceptron neural network which can be adaptively trained to showcase the true nature of the compatibility 
index. The proposed prototype model is used to quantify the relevant attributes, use them to train the prediction engine, 
and to define the data pipeline required for it. 
Keywords  
DISC, Psychology, Datamining, Neural Networks, Compatibility Prediction 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally large organizations have leveraged the uses of psychometric test to classify people 
into different personality types to determine if they fit the organizational culture. Recently, small 
scale organizations and new startups also have started to realize the need of psychometric based 
classification. DISC [1] theory is a model proposed by William Moulton Marston, and is used 
extensively in the industry for such classification of personalities. 
DISC theory is widely used in the industry [2] due to its easy administration as a test, which can 
be of the form of a formal test or an informal test. Formal testing conditions include a questionnaire 
format and basic case studies. Informal testing includes approaches such as gamification using 
websites [3] or using datamining techniques [4]. 
 
DISC theory stands for the four main types of personalities in which the individuals can be placed 
in, chiefly the dominant personality type, influence personality type, steady personality type and 
compliance personality type [5]. The DISC based classification first divides the clients into two 
containers called active and passive types. The active types are typically confrontational, and are 
more ambitious than other types.  They are not easily satiated, and try to climb up the corporate 
ladder [6]. The passive type is more likely to not stand up for themselves as often as the active 
types, and are generally satisfied with their positions, and do not possess the desire to go out of the 
way to achieve their goals. The containers are further divided into sub containers called task and 
people oriented categories. Figure 1 explains how the personality types are split. The people 
associated with the task sub type are more inclined to be more ready to accept challenging tasks, 
but are more likely to be unfriendly, and correspondingly the people associated with the people 
subtype are assumed to be more people friendly and less ready to take tasks which may challenge 
their current position. 
 
 
Figure 1. Categorization of personality types 
 
The people who fit the active type and task subtype are classified as belonging to the dominant 
category, while people who fit the active type and people subtype are termed as belonging to the 
influence category. People who fit the passive type and belong to the task subtype are classified as 
compliant personality, while people who belong to the people subtype are classified as belonging 
to the steady category. In excess to these classifications, organizations typically take into account 
the scores derived from a standardized test such as Activity Vector Analysis [7], Eysenck 
Personality Questionnaire [8], and Big Five Personality Traits [9], which represents the different 
parameters which try to represent the person. The scores are then used as filtration criterion to 
eliminate candidates. This method is used because the tests are usually bias free, and there is nearly 
no possibility of discrimination in terms of race or gender, due to their standardized nature. 
 
 
LITREATURE REVIEW 
Automated systems using simple mathematical formulae have been proposed [10,11, 12] in the 
past, but the main pitfall with such systems is the lack of elasticity of the models. The hypothesis 
proposed for such approaches are quite rigid, whereas a neural network based model is malleable 
and is capable of adapting to circumstances locally as well as globally. 
Personality based classification of potential employees and as team members has been used for 
predicting if the potential candidate would fit in a group, and would they be productive or not. The 
associated business value of a candidate is often measured by the psychometric traits possessed by 
an individual [13]. The leadership of an organization is expected to be possessing some quality 
traits [14] such as and active type in their personality, as to proactively guide the organization to 
success [15]. 
DISC based systems have also been used in other applications such as for customized teaching for 
students [11], and for customizing treatment methods of dental patients [16] etc.  
Teams that are balanced in terms of personality types have been found to be statistically more 
productive than teams that do not [17]. The proposed prototype model uses synthetic data created 
with a hypothesis that a level (n+1) employee would like to balance their team by adding people 
of level (n) in the corporate ladder, who possess diametrically opposite traits as them. Here, the 
levels indicate the corporate ladder, and higher levels indicate upper echelons of management. 
This hypothesis is modeled as a synthetic dataset, which is used to pre-train a neural network 
model, which will help predict the probability that the level (n) candidate would be a fit to the team 
or not. 
A majority of the corporations use psychometric classification tasks to eliminate unsuitable 
candidates, and do not leverage the full potential of psychometric assessments. The proposed 
method takes this method one step further, and tries to optimize the psychometric compatibility at 
an individual scale by using machine learning concepts such as neural networks. These algorithms 
can be fit using existing data and then used to predict the compatibility of future recruits and their 
immediate manager. The objective of the predictions is to aid the process of forming optimal 
groups [18] for maximal productivity. 
 
PROPOSED MODEL 
For training the prediction engine, test scores obtained from a standardized test [6] are used. The 
scores are represented using six attributes namely faith, decisiveness, adaptability, dominance, 
ambition and emotional management. The structure of this feature vector is shown in figure 2. 
The test scores are scaled to range between 0 and 10 units. This is due to the fact that the neural 
networks are scale variant. The score of both the recruit and the manager being assigned are taken 
into account and concatenated together to form an input vector of dimension twelve features. The 
 
output is binary vector which gives one if both the people are compatible or else zero if the 
compatibility is less.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Structure of input features for an individual 
Faith Decisiveness Adaptability Dominance Ambition Emotional 
Management 
 
  
The synthetic data is formed by creating a dataset, in which the data points are filled according to 
discreet uniform distribution. This is to ensure that the data is consistent with the real life values. 
The distribution is centered to a value of five (The middle value) in each attribute. The values 
situated inside each feature vary between zero and ten. The optimum point is assumed to be the 
complement of the vector associated with the individual [17]. The optimum can be represented as  
 
?(?, ?) = 10 ? ?(?, sed Management, 13(1), pp.1-13. 
[14] Sahar-Khiz, A., 2010. An exploratory examination of relationships between project 
managers' emotional intelligence and personality styles (Doctoral dissertation, Walden 
University). 
[15] Slowikowski, M.K., 2005. Using the DISC behavioral instrument to guide leadership and 
communication. AORN journal, 82(5), pp.835-843. 
[16] Scarbecz, Mark. "Using the DISC system to motivate dental patients." The Journal of the 
American Dental Association 138, no. 3 (2007): 381-385. 
[17] Lykourentzou, I., Antoniou, A., Naudet, Y. and Dow, S.P., 2016, February. Personality 
matters: Balancing for personality types leads to better outcomes for crowd teams. In 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & 
Social Computing (pp. 260-273). ACM. 
[18] Craig, M., Horton, D. and Pitt, F., 2010, November. Forming reasonably optimal 
groups:(FROG). In Proceedings of the 16th ACM international conference on Supporting 
group work (pp. 141-150). ACM. 
[19] Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M. and White, H., 1989. Multilayer feedforward networks are 
universal approximators. Neural networks, 2(5), pp.359-366. 
 
 
