Undefined 0 (2017) 1–0 1
IOS Press
Difficulty-level Modeling of Ontology-based
Factual Questions
Editor(s): Name Surname, University, Country
Solicited review(s): Name Surname, University, Country
Open review(s): Name Surname, University, Country
Vinu E.V ? and P Sreenivasa Kumar
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai,
India
E-mail: {vinuev,psk}@cse.iitm.ac.in
Abstract. Semantics-based knowledge representations such as ontologies are found to be very useful in automatically
generating meaningful factual questions. Determining the difficulty-level of these system generated questions is
helpful to effectively utilize them in various educational and professional applications. The existing approaches for
finding the difficulty-level of factual questions are very simple and are limited to a few basic principles. We propose
a new methodology for this problem by considering an educational theory called Item Response Theory (IRT).
In the IRT, knowledge proficiency of end users (learners) are considered for assigning difficulty-levels, because of
the assumptions that a given question is perceived differently by learners of various proficiencies. We have done a
detailed study on the features/factors of a question statement which could possibly determine its difficulty-level
for three learner categories (experts, intermediates, and beginners). We formulate ontology-based metrics for the
same. We then train three logistic regression models to predict the difficulty-level corresponding to the three learner
categories. The output of these models is interpreted using the IRT to find the question’s overall difficulty-level. The
performance of the models based on cross-validation is found to be satisfactory and, the predicted difficulty-levels of
questions (chosen from four domains) were found to be close to their actual difficulty-levels determined by domain
experts. Comparison with the state-of-the-art method shows an improvement of 8.5% in correctly predicating the
difficulty-levels of benchmark questions.
Keywords: Difficulty-level estimation, Item response theory, Question generation
1. Introduction
A considerable amount of effort has been in-
vested into the creation of a semantics-based
knowledge representations such as ontologies where
information is formalized into machine-interpretable
formats. Among these are SNOMED CT1, Bio-
*Corresponding author. E-mail: vinuev@cse.iitm.ac.in,
mvsquare1729@gmail.com
1http://www.snomed.org/
Portal2, Disease ontology3, to name a few, which
capture domain-specific knowledge. Given these
knowledge repositories, the opportunity for creat-
ing automated systems which utilize the under-
lying knowledge is enormous. Making use of the
semantics of the information, such systems could
perform various intelligently challenging opera-
tions. For example, a challenging task which of-
ten required in an e-Learning system is to gener-
ate questions about a given topic which match the
2http://bioportal.bioontology.org/
3http://www.berkeleybop.org/ontologies/doid.owl
0000-0000/17/$00.00 c© 2017 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved
ar
X
iv
:1
70
9.
00
67
0v
1 
 [
cs
.A
I]
  3
 S
ep
 2
01
7
2 F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX
end users’ (learners’) educational need and their
proficiency level.
The problem of generating question items from
ontologies has recently gained much attention in
the computer science community [1,2,6,7,22,23].
This is mainly due to the utility of the gener-
ated questions in various educational and profes-
sional activities, such as learner assessments in e-
Learning systems, quality control in human com-
putational tasks and, fraud detection in crowd-
sourcing platforms [19], to name a few.
Traditionally, question generation (QG) ap-
proaches have largely focused on retrieving ques-
tions from raw text, databases and other non-
semantics based data sources. However, since these
sources do not capture the semantics of the do-
main of discourse, the generated questions cannot
be machine-processed, making them less employ-
able in many of the real-world applications. For ex-
ample, questions that are generated from raw text
are suitable only for language learning tasks [5].
Using semantics-based knowledge sources in QG
has various advantages, such as (1) in ontologies,
we model the semantic relationships between do-
main entities, which help in generating meaning-
ful and machine-processable questions (2) ontolo-
gies enable standard reasoning and querying ser-
vices over the knowledge, providing a framework
for generating questions more easily.
Many efforts in the ontology-based QG are ac-
companied by methods for automating the task
of difficulty-level estimation. In the E-ATG sys-
tem [21], a state-of-the-art QG system, we have
proposed an interesting method for predicting
difficulty-level of the system generated factual
questions. To recall, in that method, we assign a
relatively high difficulty score to a question, if the
concepts and roles in the question form a rare com-
bination/pattern. For example, considering movie
domain, if a question contains the roles: is based on
and won oscar, which rarely appear together, the
question is likely to be more difficult than those
questions which are formed using a common role
combination, say, is directed by and is produced by.
Even though this method can correctly predict the
difficulty-levels to a large extent, there are cases
where this method fails. This is because there are
other factors which influence the difficulty-level of
a question.
An early effort to identify factors that could po-
tentially predict the difficulty-level was by Seyler
et. al [17,18]. They have introduced a method
to classify a question as easy or hard by find-
ing the features of the similar question entities in
the Linked Open Data (LOD). Feature values for
the classification task are obtained based on the
connectivity of the question entities in the LOD.
We observed that, rather than mapping to LOD –
which is not always possible in the case of highly
specific domains/domain-entities – incorporating
domain knowledge in the form of terminological
axioms and following an educational theory called
Item Response Theory (IRT), the prediction can
be made more accurate.
The contributions of this paper can be listed as
follows.
– We reformulate some of the existing fac-
tors/features and propose new factors which
influence the difficulty-level of a question, by
taking into account the learners’ knowledge
level (or learners’ category).
– We introduce ontology-based metrics for find-
ing the feature values.
– With the help of standard feature selection
methods in machine learning and by using a
test dataset, we study the influence of these
factors in predicting hardness of a question
for three standard learner categories.
– We then propose three learner-specific regres-
sion models trained only with the respective
influential features and, the output of the
models is interpreted using the IRT to find
the overall difficulty-level of a question.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 con-
tains the preliminaries required for understand-
ing the paper. Section 3 discusses the outline of
the proposed method. In Section 4, we give an
account of the related works. Section 5 proposes
the set of features of a question which determines
its difficulty-level. In Section 6, we explain the
machine learning methods that we have adopted
to develop the Difficulty-level Model (DLM). Fur-
ther, we discuss the performance of DLM in Sec-
tion 6.1. A comparison with the state-of-the-art
method is given in Section 7. Conclusions and fu-
ture line of research are detailed at the end.
2. Preliminaries
We assume the reader to be familiar with De-
scription Logics[9] (DLs). DLs are decidable frag-
F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX 3
ments of first-order logic with the following build-
ing blocks: unary predicates (called concepts), bi-
nary predicates (called roles), instances of con-
cepts (called individuals) and values in role asser-
tions (called literals). A DL ontology is thought of
as a body of knowledge describing some domain
using a finite set of DL axioms. The concept asser-
tions and role assertions form the assertion com-
ponent (or ABox) of the ontology. The concept in-
clusion, concept equality, role hierarchy etc. (the
type of axioms depend on the expressivity of the
DL) form the terminological component (or TBox)
of the ontology.
2.1. Question generation using patterns
For a detailed study of difficulty-level estima-
tion, we use the pattern-based method, employed
in the E-ATG system, for generating factual ques-
tions from the ABox of the given ontologies.
In the pattern-based question generation, a
question can be considered as a set of conditions
that asks for a solution which is explicitly present
in the ontology. The set of conditions is formed us-
ing different combinations of concepts and roles as-
sertions associated with an individual in the ontol-
ogy. Example-1 is on such question, framed from
the following assertions that are associated with
the (key) individual birdman.
Movie(birdman)
isDirectedBy(birdman,alejandro)
hasReleaseDate(birdman,"Aug 27 2014")
Example 1 Name the Movie that is directed by
Alejandro and has release date Aug 27, 2014.
For generating a question of the above type,
we may need to use a (generic) SPARQL query
template as shown below. The resultant tuples
are then associated with a question pattern (E.g.,
Name the [?C], that is [?R1] [?o1] and [?R2] [?o2].
(key: ?s)) to frame the questions.
SELECT ?s ?C ? R1 ?o1 ?R2 ?o2 WHERE
{
?s a ?C . ?s ?R1 ?o1 . ?s ?R2 ?o2 .
?R1 a owl:ObjectProperty .
?R2 a owl:DatatypeProperty .
}
In [21], the authors have studied all the possible
generic question patterns that are useful in gener-
ating common factual questions. They have also
proposed methods for selecting domain-relevant
resultant tuple55s/questions for conducting do-
main related assessments. A resultant tuple of the
above query (for example, ?s = birdman, ?C =
Movie, ?R1 = isDirectedBy, ?o1 = alejandro,
?R2 = hasReleaseDate, ?o2 = "Aug 27 2014")
can be represented in the form of a set of triples
({(birdman, a, Movie), (birdman, isDirectedBy,
alejandro), (birdman, hasReleaseDate, "Aug
27 2014")}). These triples, without the key, give
rise to concept expressions that represent the con-
ditions in the question. For example, the con-
cept expression of “( , a, Movie)” is the con-
cept Movie itself. Similarly, the concept expres-
sion of “( , isDirectedBy, alejandro)” is
?isdirectedBy.{alejandro}. The conditions for
the question given in Example-1 are:
Conditions: Movie, ?isdirectedBy.{alejandro},
?hasReleaseDate.{"Aug 27 2014"}
It should be noted that, ?directedBy.{alejandro}
does not imply that the movie is directed only by
Alejandro, but it is mandatory that he should be
a director of the movie.
For the ease of understanding, all examples pre-
sented in this paper are from the Movie domain.
2.2. Item Response Theory
Item Response Theory (IRT) [14] models re-
lationship between the ability or trait of a per-
son and his responses to the items in an experi-
ment. The term item denotes an entry, statement
or a question used in the experiment. The item re-
sponse can be dichotomous (yes or no; correct or
incorrect; true or false) or polytomous (more than
two options such as rating of a product). The qual-
ity measured by the item may be knowledge profi-
ciency, aptitude, belief or even attitude. This the-
ory was first proposed in the field of psychomet-
rics, later, the theory was employed widely in ed-
ucational research to calibrate and evaluate ques-
tions items in the world-wide examinations such as
the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) and Graduate
Record Examination (GRE) [8].
In our experiments, we use the simplest IRT
model often called Rasch model or the one-
parameter logistic model (1PL) [11]. According to
this model, a learner’s response to a question item
is determined by her knowledge proficiency level
(a.k.a. trait level) and the difficulty of the item.
1PL is expressed in terms of the probability that
4 F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX
a learner with a particular trait level will correctly
answer a question that has a particular difficulty-
level. [14] represents this model as:
P (Rli = 1|?l, ?i) =
e(?l??i)
1 + e(?l??i)
(1)
In the equation, Rli refers to the response (R)
made by the learner l for the question item i
(where Rli = 1 refers to a correct response), ?l
denotes the trait level of the learner l, ?i repre-
sents the difficulty score of item i. ?l and ?i val-
ues are normalized to be in the range [-1.5 to 1.5].
P (Rli = 1|?l, ?i) denotes the conditional probabil-
ity that a learner l will respond to item i correctly.
For example, the probability that a below-average
trait level (say, ?l = ?1.4) learner will correctly
answer a question that has a relatively high hard-
ness (say, ? = 1.3) is:
P =
e(?1.4?1.3)
1 + e(?1.4?1.3)
=
e(?2.7)
1 + e(?2.7)
= 0.063
In the paper, we intend to find the ?i of the factual
questions which are meant for learners, whose trait
levels are known to be either high, medium or low.
We find the trait levels of the learners by gathering
(and normalizing) their grades or marks obtained
for a standard test of subject matter conducted
in their enrolled institutions. The corresponding
P values are obtained by finding the ratio of the
number of learners (in the trait level under con-
sideration) who have correctly answered the item,
to the total number of learners at that trait level.
On getting the values for ?l and P , the value for
?i was calculated using the Equation-2.
?i = ?l ? loge(
P
1? P
) (2)
In the equation, ?i = ?l, when P is 0.50. That
is, a question’s difficulty is defined as the trait level
required for a learner to have 50 percent prob-
ability of answering the question item correctly.
Therefore, for a trait level of ?l = 1.5, if ?i ? 1.5,
we can consider that the question as having a
high difficulty-level. Similarly, for a trait level of
?l = 0, if ?i ? 0, the question has a medium
difficulty-level. In the same sense, for a trait level
of ?l = ?1.5, if ?i ? ?1.5, then question has a low
difficulty-level.
3. Outline of the proposed method
In this paper, based on the insights obtained
by the study of the questions that are generated
from the ATG[20] and E-ATG systems, we propose
features/factors that can positively or negatively
influence the difficulty-level of a question. Albeit
there are existing methods which utilize some of
these factors for predicting difficulty-level, study-
ing the psychometric aspects of these factors by
considering learners’ perspective about the ques-
tion, has given us further insight into the problem.
As we saw in Section 2.2, IRT is an item oriented
theory which could be used to find the difficulty-
level of a question by knowing the question’s hard-
ness (difficult or not difficult) with respect to var-
ious learner categories. Therefore, on finding the
hardness of a given question based each on learner
category, we can effectively use the IRT model for
interpreting its overall difficulty-level.
According to IRT, a question is assigned a high
difficulty-level if it is difficult for an expert learner
to answer it correctly. A question is said to be dif-
ficult for an expert if the probability of a group
of expert learners answering the question correctly
is ? 0.5. Similarly, a question can be assigned a
medium and low difficulty-level if the probability
with which the question is answered by a group of
intermediate learners is ? 0.5 and a group of be-
ginner level learners is ? 0.5, respectively. Table 1
shows the difficulty-level assignment of three ques-
tions: Q1, Q2 and Q3, based on whether they are
difficult (denoted as d) or not difficult (represented
as nd) for three learner categories.
Table 1
Assigning one of the three difficulty-levels: high, medium
and low, by considering whether the question is difficult (d)
or not-difficult (nd) for three learner categories.
Qn. Expert Intermed. Beginner Difficulty
-level
Q1 d d d high
Q2 nd d d medium
Q3 nd nd d low
We consider three standard categories of learn-
ers: beginners, intermediates and experts, and
model three classifiers for predicting the difficulty
corresponding to the three learner categories, as
shown in Fig. 1. Since the hardness (d/nd) corre-
F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX 5
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the proposed model for predicting
a question’s difficulty-level
sponding to the three categories of learners should
be predicted first from the feature values, machine
learning models/classifiers which can learn from
available training data is an obvious choice. We
consider only those factors which are influential
for a given learner category for training the mod-
els. The output of the three classifiers is matched
with the content of Table 1 to find the question’s
overall difficulty-level.
4. Related Work: Difficulty-level Estimation
A simple notion to find the difficulty-level
of an ontology-generated multiple choice ques-
tions (MCQs) was first introduced by Cubric and
Tosic[10]. Later, in [3], Alsubait et al. extended
the idea and proposed a similarity-based theory
for controlling the difficulty of ontology-generated
MCQs. In [6], they have applied the theory on
analogy type MCQs. In [4], the authors have ex-
perimentally verified their approach in a student-
course setup. The practical solution which they
have suggested to find out the difficulty-level of an
MCQ is with respect to the degree of similarity
of the distractors to the key. If the distractors are
very similar to the key, students may find it very
difficult to answer the question, and hence it can
be concluded that the MCQ is difficult.
In many a case, the question statement in an
MCQ is also a deciding factor for the difficulty of
an MCQ. For instance, the predicate combination
or the concepts used in a question can be cho-
sen such that they can make the MCQ difficult
or easy to answer. This is the reason why in this
paper we focus on finding difficulty-level of ques-
tions having no choices (i.e., non-MCQs). An ini-
tial investigation of this aspect was done in [21].
Concurrently, there was another relevant work by
Seyler et. al[17,18], focusing on QG from knowl-
edge graphs (KGs) such as DBpedia. For judging
the difficulty-level of such questions, they have de-
signed a classifier trained on Jeopardy! data. The
classifier features were based on statistics com-
puted from the KGs (Linked Open Data) and
Wikipedia. However, they have not considered the
learner’s knowledge level, as followed in the IRT,
while formulating the feature metrics. This makes
their measures less employable in sensitive applica-
tions such as in an e-Learning system. While con-
sidering ontology-based questions, one of the main
limitation of their approach is that the feature val-
ues were determined based on the connectivity of
question entities in the KG, whereas in the con-
text of DL ontologies, the terminological axioms
can be also incorporated to derive more meaning-
ful feature metrics. In addition, the influence of
the proposed factors in determining the difficulty
using feature selection methods was not studied.
5. Proposed Factors to determine Difficulty-level
of Questions
In this section, we look at a set of factors which
can possibly influence the difficulty-level of a ques-
tion and propose ontology-based metrics to calcu-
late them. The intuitions for choosing those fac-
tors are also detailed.
To recall, a given question can be thought of as a
set of conditions. For example, consider the follow-
ing questions (where the underlined portions de-
note the equivalent ontology concepts/roles used).
Qn-1: Name the Movie that was directed by Clint
Eastwood.
Qn-2: Name the Oscar movie that was directed by
Clint Eastwood.
The equivalent set of conditions of the two ques-
tions can be written as:
Conditions in Qn-1: Movie,
?directedBy.{clint eastwood}
Conditions in Qn-2: Oscar movie,
?directedBy.{clint eastwood}
5.1. Popularity
Popularity is considered as a factor because of
the intuition that the greater the popularity of
6 F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX
the entities that form the question, more likely
that a learner answers the question correctly. (We
observe that this notion is applicable for learn-
ers of all categories.) Therefore, the question be-
comes easier to answer if the popularity of the con-
cepts and roles that are present in the question is
high. For example, out of the following two ques-
tions, Qn-3 is likely to be easy to answer than Qn-
4, since Oscar movie is a popular concept than
Thriller movie.
Qn-3: Name an oscar movie.
Qn-4: Name a thriller movie.
Our approach for measuring popularity is based
on the observation that, (similar to what we see in
Wikipedia data) if more articles talk about a cer-
tain entity, the more important, or popular, this
entity is. In Wikipedia, when an article mentions a
related entity, it is usually denoted by a link to the
corresponding Wikipedia page. These links form a
graph which is exploited for measuring the impor-
tance of an entity within Wikipedia. Keeping this
in mind, we can define the popularity of an entity
(individual) in an ontology as the number of ob-
ject properties which are linked to it from other
individuals. For obtaining a measure in the inter-
val [0,1], we divide the number of in-links by the
total amount of individuals in the ontology.
To find the popularity of a concept C in ontol-
ogy O, we find the mean of the popularities of all
the individuals which satisfy C in O. If the con-
dition in a question is a role restriction, then the
concept expression of it will be considered, and
popularity is calculated. The overall popularity of
the question is determined by taking the mean of
the popularities of all the concepts and role re-
strictions present in it.
5.2. Selectivity
Selectivity of the conditions in a question helps
in measuring the quality of the hints that are
present in it [17]. Given a condition, selectivity
refers to the number of individuals that satisfy it.
When the selectivity is high, a question tends to
be easy to answer. For example, among the fol-
lowing questions, clearly, Qn-5 is easier to answer
than Qn-6. This is because finding an actor who
has acted in at least a movie is easy to answer
than finding an actor who has acted in a particu-
lar movie; finding the latter requires more specific
knowledge.
Qn-5: Name an actor who acted in a movie.
Qn-6: Name an actor who acted in Argo.
To formalize such a notion, we can look at the an-
swer space corresponding to each of the conditions
in the questions. Answer space simply denotes the
count of individuals satisfying a given condition.
We will represent answer space of a condition c as
ASpace(c).
The conditions in the above questions are:
Conditions in Qn-5: Actor, ?actedIn.Movie
Conditions in Qn-6: Actor, ?actedIn.{argo}
Since ASpace(?actedIn.{argo}) is very much
lesser than ASpace(?actedIn.Movie), we can say
that Qn-6 is difficult to answer than Qn-5. (Actors
who acted only in dramas are not possible answers
to Qn-5.)
As a question can have more than one conditions
present in it, answer spaces of all the condition
have to be taken into account while calculating
the overall difficulty score of the question. It is
debatable that including a specific condition in the
question can always make the question difficult to
answer – sometimes a specific condition can give
a better hint to a (proficient) learner.
For example, the following question is more dif-
ficult to answer than Qn-5 and Qn-6 for a non-
expert, since ASpace(American actor) <<ASpace(Actor).
Qn-7: Name an American actor who acted in Argo.
However, for an expert, given that the actor is an
American is an additional hint, making the ques-
tion sometimes easier than Qn-5 and 6. There-
fore, we can roughly assume the relation between
difficulty-level and answer space as follows, where
Dexpert and Dbeginner correspond to the difficulty-
level for an expert learner and difficulty-level for a
beginner respectively. We will closely look at these
relations in the following subsections.
Dexpert ? ASpace
Dbeginner ?
1
ASpace
When a question contains multiple conditions,
we do an aggregation of their normalized (or
relative) answer spaces (denoted as RASpace)
to find the overall answer space (addressed as
ASpaceOverall) of the question. We find the
RASpace of a concept by dividing the count of in-
F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX 7
Fig. 2. Relation between selectivity and answer space for
experts
dividuals satisfying the concept by the total count
of individuals in the apex concept (Thing class)
of the ontology. For instance, RASpace({argo})
= ASpace({argo})/ASpace(owl:Thing). Simi-
larly, if the condition is a role related restric-
tion, corresponding domain concept of the role
will be used to find the relative answer space.
For ?actedIn.{argo}, RASpace is calculated as:
ASpace(?actedIn.{argo})/ASpace(Domain(actedIn)).
The overall answer space can be found by tak-
ing the average of all the relative answer spaces
of the conditions in the question, where CS =
{t1, t2, ..., tn} is the set of conditions in the ques-
tion S, and |CS | = n.
ASpaceOverall(CS) =
?n
i=1RASpace(ti)
n
(3)
In the following paragraphs, we discuss how the
selectivity feature would affect the difficulty-level
of an item. We discuss the cases of expert, interme-
diate and beginner learners separately. In the pro-
cess, we define two selectivity based features and
specify how to compute them using the knowledge
base and the domain ontology.
Expert learner An expert learner is assumed to
have a well developed structured knowledge about
the domain of discourse. She is supposed to clearly
distinguish the terminologies of the domain and is
capable of doing reasoning over them. Therefore,
in general, selectivity can be assumed to be di-
rectly proportional to the difficulty-level; that is,
when the ASpaceOverall increases, the underlying
hints becomes poor and the question is likely to
become difficult for her. However, intuitively, be-
low and beyond particular ASpaceOverall values, a
question’s difficulty does not necessarily follow this
Fig. 3. Relation between selectivity and answer space for
beginners
proportionality. As pointed out in [21,20] when a
question pattern becomes rare, it becomes diffi-
cult to answer the question correctly. Therefore, in
Fig. 2, towards the left of the point A, the question
tends to become difficult, since the answer space
becomes too small. Similarly, towards the right of
the point B, the question tends to become more
generic and its difficulty diminishes. To accurately
predict whether a question is difficult or not, it is
necessary to statistically determine the positions
of the points A and B. Based on the initial analysis
of the empirical data obtained from [21], we pro-
cessed with an assumption that the question tends
to become too generic when the ASpaceOverall
? 50% of the total number of individuals in the
ontology. Similarly, the question starts to become
difficult when the ASpaceOverall ? 10% of the
total number of individuals. The selectivity corre-
sponding to an expert is expressed as SelectivityEx.
Knowing the overall answer space of a question,
selectivity is computed directly from the graph in
Fig. 2 – in the graph, Max, A(10%) and B(50%)
are known points.
Beginner learner A beginner is assumed to have
a less developed internal knowledge structure. She
can be assumed to be familiar with the generic
(sometimes popular) information about the do-
main and is less aware about the detailed specifics.
We assume that the selectivity factor behaves pro-
portionally to the ASpaceOverall, unlike what we
saw in the experts’ case. The intuition behind this
assumption is that, when the overall answer space
increases, as in the case of an expert the so-called
hints in the question cannot be expected to be-
come poor; this is because, a person with poorly
developed domain knowledge may not be able to
8 F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX
differentiate the quality or property of the hint,
making it rather a factor for generalizing the ques-
tion (thereby making the question easily answer-
able). Therefore, we can follow a linear propor-
tionality relation as shown in Fig. 3, to find the
difficulty for a beginner, and we can denote this
new selectivity as SelectivityBg.
Intermediate learner An intermediate learner
can be assumed to have partially both the per-
spective of an expect as well that of a beginner.
Therefore, we can assume her selectivity value as
combination of SelectivityEx and SelectivityBg –
considering them as two factors.
5.3. Coherence
In the current context, coherence captures the
semantic relatedness of entities (individuals and
concepts) in a question. It can be best compared
to measuring the co-occurrences of individuals and
concepts in the text. While considering coherence
as a factor, we assume that higher the coherence
between individuals/concepts in a question, lower
is its difficulty-level and vice versa, because intu-
itively, the facts about highly coherent entities are
likely to be recalled easier than the facts about less
coherent entities. It is observed that this notion is
applicable for learners of all categories.
Qn-8: Name the hollywood-movie starring Anil Kapoor
and Tom Cruise.
Qn-9: Name the hollywood-movie starring Tom Cruise
and Tim Robbins.
Considering the above two questions, coherence
between the concept HollywoodMovie and the
individuals: anil kapoor, tom cruise, is lesser
(since there is only one movie they both have acted
together) than the coherence between HollywoodMovie,
tom cruise and tim robbins, making the former
question difficult to answer than the latter.
Given an ontology, we measure the coherence
between two of its individuals as the sum of the
ratio between the size of the set of entities that
point to both individuals and the size of the union
of the sets of entities that point to either one of the
individuals, and the ratio between the size of the
set of entities that are pointed by both individuals
and the size of the union of the sets of entities
that are pointed by either one of the individuals.
Formally, the coherence between two individuals
p and q can be represented as in Eq. 4, where Ii
is the set of entities from which the individual i
is having incoming relations and Oi is the set of
entities to which i is having outgoing relations.
Coherence(p, q) =
|Ip ? Iq|
|Ip ? Iq|
+
|Op ?Oq|
|Op ?Oq|
(4)
Each portion of the measure is known as the Jac-
card similarity coefficient, which is a statistical
method to compare the similarity of sets.
5.4. Specificity
Specificity refers to how specific a question is.
For example, among the following questions, Qn-2
is more specific question than Qn-10 and requires
more knowledge proficiency to answer it correctly.
We consider Qn-2 as more difficult to answer than
Qn-10.
Qn-2: Name an Oscar movie that was directed by
Clint Eastwood.
Qn-10: Name the movie that is related to Clint East-
wood.
For a learner, the difficulty-level depends on how
detailed the question is. Intuitively, if a question
contains domain specific conditions, the probabil-
ity of a learner for correctly answering the ques-
tion will reduce. (This notion is observed to be
applicable for all categories of learners.) To cap-
ture this notion, we utilize the concept and role
hierarchies in the domain ontology. We relate the
depths of the concepts and roles that are used in
the question to the concept and role hierarchies of
the ontology, to determine the question difficulty.
To achieve this, we introduce depthRatio for each
predicate p in an ontology. depthRatio is defined
as:
depthRatioO(p) =
Depth (or length) of p
from the root of the hierarchy
Maximum length of
the path containing p
(5)
For a question S, generated from an ontology O,
with x as key and P as the set of concepts/roles
in S, let C denote the set of concepts satisfied by
x, and let R represents the set of roles such that
either x is present at their domain (subject) or
range (object) position
(
i.e., R ? R =? O |=
F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX 9
R(x, i) ? R(i, x), where i is an arbitrary instance
in O
)
. For each p ? P , we find the largest subset
in C (if p is a concept) or we find the largest subset
in R (if p is a role), such that the elements in the
subset can be related using the relation v, and p is
an element in that subset. The cardinality of such
a subset forms the denominator of Eq. 5, and the
numerator is the position of the predicate p from
the right (right represents the top concept or top
role) when the elements in the subset are arranged
using the relation v.
A stem can have more than one predicate
present in it. In that case, we assume that the
predicate with a highest depthRatio (associated
with the reference individual) could potentially
make the stem more specific. Therefore, we define
the overall depthRatio of a stem (called the speci-
ficity) as the product of the average depthRatio
with the maximum of all the depthRatios.
6. Difficulty-level Modeling of Questions
In the previous section, we have proposed a set
of features which possibly influence the difficulty-
level of a question. In this section, we do a fea-
ture selection study using three widely used filter
models to find out the amount of influence of the
proposed factors in predicting question difficulty.
We then train three logistic regression models
(RMe, RMi, RMb) for each learner category (ex-
perts, intermediates and beginners, respectively)
using the selected prominent features. Their pre-
dictions for a given question are taken to find the
overall difficulty-level. Ten-fold cross validation is
used to find the performance of the three models.
Training data The training data consisted of a
set of 520 questions that were generated from four
ontologies (DSA, MAHA, GEO and PD ontologies
– see our project website4 for details) available on-
line. These questions were classified as difficult or
not-difficult for each of the three learner categories
(we denote the training data for experts, interme-
diate and beginners respectively as TDe, TDi and
TDb). The classification is done by either of the
two ways, (1) in a classroom setting by using IRT
or (2) with the help of subject matter experts. In
the former case, we find the probability by which
4Project website: https://sites.google.com/site/ontoassess/
Item identifier: dsa_1
Popularity: 0.231
Selectivity_Ex: 0.320
Selectivity_Bg: 0.113
Coherence: 0.520
Specificity: 0.440
Difficulty: d
Fig. 4. An instance of the training data
a particular question is answered correctly by a
learner of specific knowledge proficiency level and
assign it as difficulty (d) or not (nd). In the lat-
ter case, more than 5 domain experts were asked
to do the ratings and their majority ratings were
considered for assigning d or nd. All the question
that were used for training had been previously
used as benchmark sets in [12,21,20]. In the train-
ing data, the question identifiers are accompanied
by five feature values tabulated from the respec-
tive ontologies along with their difficulty assign-
ment. The feature values are normalized to values
between 0 and 1. An instance of the training data
is given in Fig. 4.
Feature Selection In order to find out the amount
of influence of each of the proposed factors, we did
an attribute evaluation study using three popular
feature selection approaches: Information Gain[15]
(IG), ReliefF[16] (RF) and Correlation-based[13]
(CB) methods. These feature selection approaches
select a subset of features that minimize redun-
dancy and maximize relevance to the target such
as the class labels in classification. The ranking
scores/weights obtained for the features are given
in Table 2.
In Table 2, we can see that, the least promi-
nent feature for finding the difficulty for experts is
the SelectivityBg, since all the three filter models
ranked it as the least influential one – see the fields
shaded in blue in the three TDe columns. In the
case of predicting difficulty for intermediates, the
ranking scores of SelectivityEx is less than that of
SelectivityBg when the models used are RF and
CB – see the fields shaded in red. When it comes to
beginner learners, the factor SelectivityEx is found
to have the least influence – see the fields shaded
in gray. While developing the IDM, we have ig-
nored the least influential features for training the
regression models.
10 F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX
Table 2
Ranking score of features for the three training sets using three popular filter models. (IG, RF and CB, denote the three
filter models: Information Gain, ReliefF and Correlation-based, respectively.)
IG RF CB
TDe TDi TDb TDe TDi TDb TDe TDi TDb
Popularity 0.7613 0.6344 0.7925 0.831 0.378 0.178 0.766 0.621 0.562
SelectivityEx 0.8802 0.6913 0.0963 0.738 0.451 0.120 0.699 0.258 0.058
SelectivityBg 0.0012 0.6553 0.9996 0.008 0.668 0.177 0.114 0.442 0.249
Coherence 0.5638 0.3251 0.8112 0.761 0.487 0.211 0.731 0.538 0.315
Specificity 0.6577 0.5436 0.5751 0.651 0.521 0.459 0.657 0.761 0.602
Observations Consistent to what we have postu-
lated in Section 5.2, SelectivityEx is found to be a
more influential factor than SelectivityBg, for de-
ciding the difficulty of a question for an expert
learner. Similarly, for a beginner, SelectivityBg is
found to be more influential than SelectivityEx.
6.1. Performance of regression models
The performances of three learner-specific re-
gression models: RMe, RMi, RMb, considering all
the 5 features are 76.73%, 78.6% and 84.23% re-
spectively. These percentage values indicate the
ratio of the number of instances classified correctly
to the total number of instances given for classifi-
cation, under 10-fold cross-validation setting. Af-
ter removing the least influential features, the per-
formance of the classifiers became 76.9%, 79.8%,
and 85% respectively. The difference in the perfor-
mance before and after feature selection is roughly
the same because the model can theoretically as-
sign minimum or zero weight to non-influential
features. However, we did the feature selection and
ranking to evaluate our hypothesis about what fea-
tures are influential in which case.
When the overall system was run on the avail-
able dataset of factual questions from different do-
mains (520 questions), it is observed that DLM
correctly classifies about 77% of them. These ques-
tions are relevant to the domain selected using the
heuristics given in [21].
6.2. Non-classifiable Questions
Following from what we have seen in Section 3,
the DLM could not assign a difficulty-level to a
given question if the outcomes of the three regres-
sion models do not agree with the three possible
Fig. 5. Classifiable Vs Non-classifiable questions
assignments (see Fig. 1). We call such questions
as non-classifiable ones and the others as classi-
fiable questions. We investigated the percentage
of such non-classifiable cases by analyzing ques-
tions generated from five ontologies available on-
line (available in our project website). We used
questions that were generated in [20] for our study,
the statistics of the non-classifiable cases are given
in Fig. 5 (Note that the X-axis begins with 50%).
On an average, 10% of all the questions generated
from an ontology are found to be non-classifiable.
An analysis of the non-classifiable questions
taken from the DSA ontology shows that incom-
pleteness of the ontology and the way the domain
is modeled as an ontology are the main reasons
for this discrepancy. For example, Name a doubly
linked list is a question which is assigned to be dif-
ficult for an expert (since the Doubly Linked List
concept has only one individual and the incom-
pleteness of data makes it a less popular concept),
and not difficult for a beginner (the depthRatio
is high for the concept Doubly Linked List be-
F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX 11
cause, it forms a specific concept in the ontology.
However, this issue would not have appeared, if
the concept Doubly Linked List had been mod-
eled as an individual.
7. Comparison with existing method
In this section, we compare the predictions of
difficult-levels by the proposed model and the
method given in [21]. We call the latter as E-ATG
method. We do not report a comparison with the
model proposed in [17,18] because their difficulty-
level model is not a domain ontology-based model
and prediction is possible only if the question com-
ponents can be mapped to Linked Open Data en-
tities. In addition, they could predict the ques-
tion difficulty either as easy or hard, whereas our
model classifies the question into three standard
difficulty-levels: high, medium and low.
In [21], effectiveness of E-ATG method is estab-
lished by comparing the predicated difficulty-levels
with their actual difficulty-levels determined in a
classroom setting. DSA ontology was used for the
study. Twenty four representative questions (given
in Appendix A), selected from 128213 generated
questions, were utilized for the comparison. (More
details about the selection process can be found
at [21]). A correlation of 67% between the pre-
dicted and actual difficulty-levels was observed5.
We tested the approach proposed in this paper on
the above set of questions.
While comparing the proposed difficulty-levels
with the actual difficult-levels, we found that
21 out of 24 are matching (87.5% correlation),
and one benchmark question is identified as non-
classifiable.
7.1. Discussion
The E-ATG method mainly considered only one
feature, the triviality score (which denotes how
rare the property combination in the stem are), for
doing the predication. Our results (8.5% improve-
ment) show that the proposed set of new features
could improve the correctness of the prediction.
5To get more accurate result, the calculations were re-
done with ? values between: [-1.5, 1.5], and 1.25, 0 and -1.25
as the medians of the ? values for experts, beginners and
intermediates, respectively with ±.25 standard deviation
The current model is trained only using 520 train-
ing samples. We expect the system to perform even
better after training with more data as and when
they are available, and by identifying other im-
plicit features. Due to unavailability of large train-
ing data, unsupervised feature learning methods
cannot be effectively applied in this context.
8. Conclusions and Future Work
Establishing mechanisms to control and predict
the difficulty of assessment questions is clearly a
big gap in existing question generation literature.
Our contributions have covered the deeper aspects
of the problem, and proposed strategies, that ex-
ploit ontologies and associated measures, to pro-
vide a better difficulty-level predicting model, that
can address this gap. We developed the difficulty-
level model (DLM) by introducing three learner-
specific logistic regression models for predicting
the difficulty of a given question for three cate-
gories of learners. The output of these three mod-
els was then interpreted using the Item Response
Theory to assign high, medium or low difficulty-
level. The overall performance of the DLM and
the individual performance of the three regression
models based on cross-validation were reported
and they are found to be satisfactory. Compar-
ison with the state-of-the-art method shows an
improvement of 8.5% in correctly predicating the
difficulty-levels of benchmark questions.
The model proposed in this paper for predicting
the difficulty-level of questions is limited to ABox-
based factual questions. It would be interesting to
extend this model to questions that are generated
using the TBox-based approaches. However, the
challenges to be addressed would be much more,
since, in the TBox-based methods, we have to deal
with many complex restriction types (unlike in the
case of ABox-based methods) and their influence
on the difficulty-level of the question framed out
of them needs a detailed investigation.
For establishing the propositions and techniques
stated in this paper, we have implemented a sys-
tem which demonstrates the feasibility of the
methods on medium sized ontologies. It would be
interesting to investigate the working of the sys-
tem on large ontologies.
12 F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX
Acknowledgements
This project is funded by Ministry of Human
Resource Development, Gov. of India. We express
our fullest gratitude to the participants of our eval-
uation process: Dr. S.Gnanasambadan (Director
of Plant Protection, Quarantine & Storage), Min-
istry of Agriculture, Gov. of India; Mr. J. Delince
and Mr. J. M. Samraj, Department of Social Sci-
ences AC & RI, Killikulam, Tamil Nadu, India;
Ms. Deepthi.S (Deputy Manager), Vegetable and
Fruit Promotion Council Keralam (VFPCK), Ker-
ala, India; Dr. K.Sreekumar (Professor) and stu-
dents, College of Agriculture, Vellayani, Trivan-
drum, Kerala, India. We also thank all the under-
graduate and post-graduate students of Indian In-
stitute of Technology, Madras, who have partici-
pated in the empirical study.
References
[1] Asma Ben Abacha, Marcos Da Silveira, and Ce?dric
Pruski. Medical ontology validation through ques-
tion answering. In AIME, pages 196–205, 2013.
10.1007/978-3-642-38326-7 30.
[2] Maha Al-Yahya. Ontology-based multiple choice ques-
tion generation. The Scientific World Journal, Vol
2014, page 9, ID: 10.1155/2014/274949, 2014.
[3] T. Alsubait, B. Parsia, and U. Sattler. A similarity-
based theory of controlling mcq difficulty. In e-
Learning and e-Technologies in Education (ICEEE),
2013 Second International Conference on, pages 283–
288, Sept 2013.
[4] T. Alsubait, B. Parsia, and U. Sattler. Generating mul-
tiple choice questions from ontologies: Lessons learnt.
In Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on
OWL: Experiences and Directions (OWLED 2014),
volume 1265, pages 73–84, Oct 2014.
[5] Tahani Alsubait. Ontology-based multiple-choice ques-
tion generation. PhD thesis, School of Computer Sci-
ence, The University of Manchester, 2015.
[6] Tahani Alsubait, Bijan Parsia, and Ulrike Sattler. Min-
ing ontologies for analogy questions: A similarity-based
approach. volume 849 of CEUR Workshop Proceed-
ings. OWL Experiences and Directions, 2012.
[7] Tahani Alsubait, Bijan Parsia, and Ulrike Sattler.
Generating multiple choice questions from ontologies:
Lessons learnt. volume 1265 of CEUR Workshop Pro-
ceedings. OWL Experiences and Directions, 2014.
[8] Xinming An and Yiu-Fai Yung. Item response theory:
What it is and how you can use the irt procedure to
apply it. In SAS Global Forum, 2014.
[9] Franz Baader, Diego Calvanese, Deborah L. McGuin-
ness, Daniele Nardi, and Peter F. Patel-Schneider, ed-
itors. The description logic handbook: theory, imple-
mentation, and applications. Cambridge University
Press, New York, NY, USA, 2003.
[10] Marija Cubric and Milorad Tosic. Towards automatic
generation of e-assessment using semantic web tech-
nologies. In Proceedings of the 2010 International
Computer Assisted Assessment Conference, 2010.
[11] Christine DeMars. Item Response Theory: Under-
standing Statistics. Oxford University Press, 2010.
[12] Vinu E.V. and Kumar P. Sreenivasa. A novel
approach to generate mcqs from domain ontol-
ogy: Considering dl semantics and open-world as-
sumption. Web Semantics: Science, Services and
Agents on the World Wide Web, 34:40 – 54, 2015.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.websem.2015.05.005.
[13] Mark A Hall. Correlation-based Feature Selection for
Machine Learning. PhD thesis, Department of Com-
puter Science, The University of Waikato, 1999.
[14] R. Michael Furr and Verne R. Bacharach. Psychomet-
rics, An Introduction. Second Edition. SAGE Publi-
cations, Inc, 2014.
[15] Hanchuan Peng, Fuhui Long, and Chris Ding. Fea-
ture selection based on mutual information: Criteria of
max-dependency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 27(8):1226–
1238, August 2005.
[16] Marko Robnik-S?ikonja and Igor Kononenko. Theoret-
ical and empirical analysis of relieff and rrelieff. Ma-
chine Learning, 53(1):23–69, 2003.
[17] Dominic Seyler, Mohamed Yahya, and Klaus
Berberich. Generating quiz questions from knowledge
graphs. In Proceedings of the 24th International Con-
ference on World Wide Web, WWW ’15 Companion,
pages 113–114, New York, NY, USA, 2015. ACM.
[18] Dominic Seyler, Mohamed Yahya, and Klaus
Berberich. Knowledge questions from knowledge
graphs. CoRR, abs/1610.09935, 2016.
[19] Dominic Seyler, Mohamed Yahya, Klaus Berberich,
and Omar Alonso. Automated question generation for
quality control in human computation tasks. In Pro-
ceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Web Science,
WebSci 2016, Hannover, Germany, May 22-25, 2016,
pages 360–362, 2016.
[20] Ellampallil Venugopal Vinu and Puligundla Sreeni-
vasa Kumar. Improving large-scale assessment tests
by ontology based approach. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Eighth International Florida Artificial Intel-
ligence Research Society Conference, FLAIRS 2015,
Hollywood, Florida. May 18-20, 2015., page 457, 2015.
[21] E.V Vinu and P. Sreenivasa Kumar. Automated gener-
ation of assessment tests from domain ontologies. Se-
mantic Web Journal, In Press, 2016.
[22] Branko Z?itko, Slavomir Stankov, Marko Rosic?, and Ani
Grubi?sic?. Dynamic test generation over ontology-based
knowledge representation in authoring shell. Expert
Systems with Applications, 36(4):8185 – 8196, 2009.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2008.10.028.
[23] Konstantinos Zoumpatianos, Andreas Papasalouros,
and Konstantinos Kotis. Automated transformation of
swrl rules into multiple-choice questions. In R. Charles
Murray and Philip M. McCarthy, editors, FLAIRS
Conference. AAAI Press, 2011.
F. Author et al. / Instructions for the preparation of a camera-ready paper in LATEX 13
Appendix A
Tables 3-5 contain benchmark stems that are
generated from the Data Structures and Algo-
rithms (DSA) ontology. In those tables, the stems
1 to 6, 7 to 16 and 17 to 24 correspond to high,
medium and low (actual) difficulty-levels respec-
tively. These stems were employed in the experi-
ment mentioned in Section 7. Stems- 7, 8 and 20
are the uncorrelated ones. Stem-20 is identified as
non-classifiable questions by our approach.
Table 3
Questions generated from the DSA ontology that are having
high actual difficulty-levels.
Item No. Stems of MCQs
1 Name a polynomial time problem with appli-
cation in computing canonical form of the dif-
ference between bound matrices.
2. Name an NP-complete problem with applica-
tion in pattern matching and is related to fre-
quent subtree mining problem.
3. Name an all pair shortest path algorithm that
is faster than Floyd-Warshall Algorithm.
4. Name an application of an NP-complete prob-
lem that is also known as Rucksack problem.
5. Name a string matching algorithm that is
faster than Robin-Karp algorithm.
6. Name a polynomial time problem that is also
known as maximum capacity path problem.
Table 4
Questions generated from the DSA ontology that are hav-
ing medium actual difficulty-levels.
Item No. Stems of MCQs
7. Name an NP-hard problem with application in
logistics.
8. Name the one whose worst time complexity is
n exp 2 and with Avg time complexity n exp
2.
9. Name the one which operates on output re-
stricted dequeue and operates on input re-
stricted dequeue.
10. Name the operation of a queue that operates
on a priority queue.
11. Name a queue operation that operates on dou-
ble ended queue and operates on a circular
queue.
12. Name the ADT that has handling process
“LIFO”.
13. Name an internal sorting algorithm with worse
time complexity m plus n.
14. Name a minimum spanning tree algorithm
with design technique greedy method.
15. Name an internal sorting algorithm with time
complexity n log n.
16. Name an Internal Sorting Algorithm with
worse time complexity n exp 2.
Table 5
Questions generated from the DSA ontology that are hav-
ing low actual difficulty-levels.
Item No. Stems of MCQs
17. Name a file operation.
18. Name a heap operation.
19. Name a tree search algorithm.
20. Name a queue with operation dequeue.
21. Name a stack operation.
22. Name a single shortest path algorithm.
23. Name a matrix multiplication algorithm.
24. Name an external sorting algorithm.
